PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 1 of 31 Chapter 6 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS1 ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL Sec. 6-1. False testimony before city council or city board or commission. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to give false testimony under oath or affirmation during any hearing before the city council or any boards or commissions of the city.  (b) Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be
of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-4.  (Code 1971, § 13-28) Sec. 6-2. Prohibition against serving on more than two boards or commissions simultaneously. No person shall serve on more than two city boards, commissions, agencies, advisory committees, authorities and all other appointments by the mayor, the city council, or the city council president simultaneously. In the event that a person is appointed to a city board or commission for a
is appointed to a city board or commission for a term which coincides with any portion of a term of two other city boards or commissions of which he or she is a member, then that appointment shall be null and void.  The foregoing shall not apply to any member of a city board or commission who shall serve in an ex officio capacity.  (Ord. No. O-09-5, § I, 2-19-09) Sec. 6-3. Scheduling of meetings. Meetings of the planning board or the zoning board of review shall not be scheduled to or otherwise
of review shall not be scheduled to or otherwise coincide with a regularly scheduled meeting of the Warwick City Council or any committees thereof.  (Ord. No. O-21-25, § I, 12-10-21) Secs. 6-4—6-30. Reserved. ARTICLE II. DIVERSITY COMMISSION2  1Cross reference(s)—Harbor management commission, § 24-5; Warwick Station Redevelopment Agency (WSRA), § 51-22 et. seq.  2Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. O-07-16, § I, adopted July 10, 2007, repealed § 6-31, which pertained to established affirmative action
which pertained to established affirmative action commission; membership; duties; organization and derived from Ord. No. O-94-20, § I, 9-
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 2 of 31  12-94; Ord. No. O-96-22, § I, 6-10-96. Subsequently, Ord. No. O-07-15, § I, adopted July 10, 2007, added § 6-31 to read as herein set out.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 3 of 31 Sec. 6-31. Established; membership; duties; organization. Under the authority granted to the city council under section 8-20, entitled "additional boards," of the City Charter, a diversity commission shall be established. The commission shall consist of seven members; four of which shall be appointed by the mayor and three of which shall be appointed by the city council president, upon recommendation of council members. The
upon recommendation of council members. The members shall be appointed for a term of four years and shall serve without compensation. The commission at its first meeting shall select a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary from among its members and adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of the City Charter and the personnel merit system. It shall be the duty of the commission, in cooperation with the director of
commission, in cooperation with the director of personnel and appointing officers, to assist all municipal departments and divisions to ensure that they are fully integrating all residents into the work they do for the community and that they are accessible to all residents.  (Ord. No. O-07-15, § I, 7-10-07) Secs. 6-32—6-50. Reserved. ARTICLE III. BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW3 Sec. 6-51. Rules of procedure for appeals from assessments. The procedure to be followed in the filing of appeals by
to be followed in the filing of appeals by property owners from assessments as determined by the tax assessor is as follows:  (1) All appeals to the board of assessment review shall be on petitions provided by such board and must be filed with such board no later than December 15, 1977, and October 15 of each year thereafter.  (2) All questions on such petition shall be answered completely.  (3) A separate petition shall be filed for each review requested.  (4) The owner of record must file all
requested.  (4) The owner of record must file all petitions or, if this is not possible, his/her mark or the signature of his/her legal representative must appear, and his/her title must be affixed thereto.  (5) Petitioners will be notified of the time and place of the hearing.  (6) The owner of record, or his/her representative, must appear at such hearing. If persons other than the owner of record are to testify, then a written authorization filed by the landowner of record must be presented
by the landowner of record must be presented and recorded.  (7) Failure on the part of any petitioner or his/her legal representative to appear at the time and place designated by such board for his/her petition to be heard, without prior notification, will be recorded as a default by nonappearance.  a. Any petition so recorded will not be reheard for a period of one fiscal year. No petition may be resubmitted for any year for which a prior petition was recorded as a default due to the
petition was recorded as a default due to the nonappearance of the petitioner or his/her legal representative.  b. There shall be no rehearing of any petition for the period of one fiscal year, unless the petitioner can present new or different evidence, which evidence could not have been presented to such  3Cross reference(s)—Taxation, ch. 74.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 4 of 31 board at the time of the original hearing, or unless in the opinion of such board unusual circumstances warrant a rehearing.  (8) The procedure for rehearing shall be as follows:  a. A new petition must be filed with an accompanying list or brief explanation.  b. The board of assessment review, at its regular meeting after the filing of the petition for rehearing, will decide on the merits for a rehearing, and the petitioner
on the merits for a rehearing, and the petitioner will be notified in writing of the findings and recommendations of such board.  (9) Attorneys, expert witnesses, and any other persons may be presented by the petitioners to such board in the hearing of any petitions.  (10) All testimony given before such board shall be under oath and shall be recorded.  (11) The proceedings of the board of assessment review shall be recorded and kept in a minutes book provided by such board. This minutes book
book provided by such board. This minutes book shall never leave the office of the board of assessment review.  (12) All decisions of the board of assessment review shall be by resolution.  (13) The public hearing of the board of assessment review shall be open to the public and to the press.  (14) All petitioners will be notified in writing of the finding, recommendations, and decision of such board.  (15) All petitions shall be numbered and heard with reference to the tax assessor's plat and
with reference to the tax assessor's plat and lot numbers.  (16) All petitions will be acknowledged by the board of assessment review by a postcard.  (17) All proceedings of the board of assessment review shall be by an agenda.  (Code 1971, § 21-1) Secs. 6-52—6-70. Reserved. ARTICLE IV. BOARD OF PUBLIC SAFETY4 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 6-71. Establishment of regulations pertaining to removal of illegally parked vehicles. The board of public safety may make further rules and regulations not
safety may make further rules and regulations not inconsistent with chapter 76 to implement the provisions of section 76-7 et seq.  (Code 1971, § 22-12) Sec. 6-72. Permits: concealed carry weapons. (a) Preamble: G.L. § 11-47-11 establishes the standards for local municipalities to issue concealed carry weapons (CCW) permits; and as qualified applicants are law-abiding citizens trained and certified in the use of firearms  4Cross reference(s)—Civil preparedness, ch. 14; fire prevention and
preparedness, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 5 of 31 they must be treated with dignity and respect as they engage in the legal right to seek said permit; while the board of public safety has the power to regulate the issuance of CCW permits for the City of Warwick, it is critical to ensure procedures and standards are not imposed in an overly broad, or arbitrary manner. Warwick residents and business owners who meet the criteria set forth by the State of RI must be ensured a
set forth by the State of RI must be ensured a timely, fair, predictable and consistent process to apply for a CCW permit through our municipal licensing authority; in an effort to promote transparency in government, avoid any misunderstandings, and protect applicants' right to due process, applicants who are denied a CCW permit must be notified of the reason(s) for disapproval in a timely, written manner; and the Warwick City Council is adamant that CCW permits processed by the board of public
that CCW permits processed by the board of public safety be issued in strict compliance with G.L. § 11-47-11.  (b) The Warwick Board of Public Safety shall adhere to the following procedures in considering the application and issuance of CCW permits: 1. The Warwick Board of Public Safety (a.k.a. "the board"), as the licensing authority for the City of Warwick is charged with issuing concealed carry weapons (CCW) permits. Individuals must be 21 years of age or older to apply for a CCW permit and
of age or older to apply for a CCW permit and meet the following criteria:  a. Have a bona fide residence or place of business within the City of Warwick verified by either the Warwick Board of Canvassers, Warwick Department of Taxation or the Warwick Chief of Police, or  b. Have a bona fide residence within the United States and a license or permit to carry a pistol or revolver concealed upon his or her person issued by the authorities of any other state or subdivision of the United States.
other state or subdivision of the United States.  c. The board will consider business, employment and personal factors when reviewing "good reasons" and "proper reasons" to determine if a CCW permit is to be issued.  2. Per G.L. § 11-47-11, the board shall issue a permit to an applicant to carry a pistol or revolver concealed upon his/her person everywhere within this state for four years from date of issue. This permit shall not contain any restrictions, however state and federal law shall
restrictions, however state and federal law shall still apply. The permit shall be issued to the applicant if:  a. It appears that the applicant has good reason to fear an injury to his or her person or property;  b. The applicant has any other proper reason for carrying a pistol or revolver;  c. He or she is a suitable person to be so licensed;  d. The applicant must demonstrate competence, familiarity and proficiency with a handgun by completing a certified NRA firearms safety course or its
a certified NRA firearms safety course or its equivalent of at least four hours, which includes classroom and range time.  (1) The firearms safety course must be completed within three years prior to the initial permit. CCW permit renewals will only require recertification on the range, as indicated by the CCW permit application.  (2) A list of certified firearms safety courses is included in the CCW permit application.  3. An applicant is not required to present a "purpose" or "need" beyond
required to present a "purpose" or "need" beyond what is called for in G.L. § 11-47-11. For the purpose of applications to the board under G.L. § 11-47-11 "Self-defense" based upon previous threats/threatening conduct within the prior six months documented by a police report or written complaint is a "good" or "proper reason. No line of questioning by the board during the interview process will call for speculation as to how the applicant may alter his or her actions to negate the request/ need
his or her actions to negate the request/ need for a CCW permit. The following may be considered when the board determines a "good" or "proper reason.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 6 of 31 a. Conditions of employment or business necessity, whether required or preferred, are considered "proper reason" for issuing a CCW permit. The nature of an applicant's work may warrant a "good reason" for a CCW permit to be approved. Examples include but are not limited to: amount of money carried, lateness of the hour, past instances of crime, the surrounding neighborhood and other dangerous circumstances.  Requesting a
and other dangerous circumstances.  Requesting a reciprocal CCW permit by the City of Warwick when a CCW permit. has been issued by the Rhode Island Attorney General is a "proper reason." Possession of a current federal firearms license is a factor in consideration of the application for the CCW permit.  c. Suitability of the applicant may also be a consideration when issuing a permit. Decisions must be based on evidence provided by the application process and not merely conjecture. The board
process and not merely conjecture. The board must articulate a specific and justifiable reason to find someone unsuitable.  4. The board will review the completed application along with three letters of reference and a background criminal investigation (BCI) within 60 calendar days of receipt. Letters of reference shall only be required for new, not renewal, permit applications. Applicants are required to appear before the board for a personal interview. A hearing with written or recorded
interview. A hearing with written or recorded minutes must be held for the applicant. The specific reason(s) for denying a CCW permit must be provided in writing by registered mail within ten business days of conducting the interview or the permit shall be automatically issued.  a. Applicants may request reconsideration in the case of a CCW permit denial by the board. Furthermore, said applicants have the right to judicial review under G.L. § 42-35-15, RI Administrative Procedures.  5.
§ 42-35-15, RI Administrative Procedures.  5. Legitimate reasons for an applicant to be deemed unsuitable to be licensed include:  a. Be ineligible to possess a firearm by virtue of having been convicted of a felony.  b. Have been found guilty of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a misdemeanor under Rhode Island General Laws or similar laws of any other state relating to a controlled dangerous substance within a five-year period immediately preceding the date on which the
immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted.  c. Found guilty of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to operating a vehicle while intoxicated within the five-year period immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted, or at any time after the application has been submitted.  d. Entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to or been found guilty of a crime of violence, as defined by G.L. §§ 11-47-2(2), 11-47-5(a), including domestic
§§ 11-47-2(2), 11-47-5(a), including domestic abuse, at the misdemeanor level, unless five years have elapsed since completion of sentence or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled, or unless the conviction was set aside and the prosecution dismissed, prior to the date on which the application is submitted.  (1) Prohibition also applies to any person sentenced to community confinement or electronic surveillance in accordance with G.L. § 11-47-5(c).  e. Been convicted of, have
G.L. § 11-47-5(c).  e. Been convicted of, have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, or be charged under indictment or a bill of information for any crime of violence or any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term of one year or greater.  f. Is a fugitive from justice.  g. Released from active or reserve duty from the Armed Forces of the United States with a discharge characterized as "bad conduct discharge", or a "dishonorable discharge". In the case of Commissioned Officers and
In the case of Commissioned Officers and Warrant Officers of the United States Armed Forces, the punishment of "dismissal" rendered subject to a verdict of "guilty" at a trial by military court-martial is
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 7 of 31 deemed to be disqualifying under this paragraph. For the purposes of this paragraph, the United States Coast Guard is considered an Armed Force.  i. Be ineligible to possess or receive a firearm under 18 U.S.C. 922(g).  j. Had a permit revoked by the board within four years prior to the most recent application.  k. Been denied a pistol permit in a jurisdiction other than the City of Warwick based on suitability grounds within
of Warwick based on suitability grounds within four years prior to the most recent application.  l. Adjudged mentally incompetent at the time of application or for five years prior to application as defined in G.L. § 40.1-5.3-3 or a comparable procedure located in another state following a hearing at which the applicant/defendant was represented by counsel or a representative.  6. Notwithstanding any other chapter or section of the general laws of the state of Rhode Island, the board shall not
of the state of Rhode Island, the board shall not provide or release to any individual, firm, association or corporation the name, address, or date of birth of any person who has held or currently holds a license or permit to carry a concealed pistol or revolver. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the release of any statistical data of a general nature relative to age, gender and racial or ethnic background nor shall it be construed to prevent the release of information to parties
to prevent the release of information to parties involved in any prosecution of § 11-47-8 or in response to a lawful subpoena in any criminal or civil action which the person is a party to that action.  a. While completing their duties and responsibilities in exercising their authority to issue or deny CCW permits in compliance with federal, state and local law, the board of public safety is acting under sovereign immunity.  7. Warwick Ordinance § 40-1(19) disorderly conduct is the prevailing
§ 40-1(19) disorderly conduct is the prevailing law for those individuals issued a CCW permit unless circumstances necessitates the gun owner to no longer keep his or her weapon concealed. Brandishing, improper exhibition or unlawful display is not permissible. Unintended viewing of the weapon as a nondeliberate act is not actionable.  (Ord. No. O-15-4, § I, 5-15-15) Secs. 6-73—6-90. Reserved. DIVISION 2. FIRE DUTIES5 Sec. 6-91. Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. Nothing in this
ordinances not affected by Code. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any section of article II of chapter 5 of the 1959 compiled ordinances, relative to the bureau of fire, and all such sections are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  (Code 1971, § 7-19)  5Cross reference(s)—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8.  State law reference(s)—Establishment of bureau of fire, P.L. 1953,
of bureau of fire, P.L. 1953, ch. 3136; P.L. 1955, ch. 3554.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 8 of 31 Sec. 6-92. General powers and duties of board of public safety in lieu of board of fire. The board of public safety shall fulfill all the duties and responsibilities of, and have all the rights and powers of, the bureau of fire, under the ordinances of the city and Public Law No. 3136, passed by the general assembly at its January 1953 session, pursuant to section 8-6 of the city Charter.  (Code 1971, § 7-20) Sec. 6-93.
the city Charter.  (Code 1971, § 7-20) Sec. 6-93. Responsibility for administration of fire department. All matters relating to the administration of the fire department shall be considered by the board of public safety as a whole, which bureau shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration and management of the fire department.  (Code 1971, § 7-21) Sec. 6-94. Authority over fire department. The board of public safety shall have the authority to appoint, remove, organize,
have the authority to appoint, remove, organize, and control the chief of the fire department, the officers and men/women of the fire department and all other attaches of the fire department of the city as such is now or hereafter may be constituted, and shall also have authority to make all needful rules, regulations, etc., for the efficiency, management and direction thereof not inconsistent with the laws of the state.  (Code 1971, § 7-22) Sec. 6-95. Temporary appointments to fill vacancies
6-95. Temporary appointments to fill vacancies in fire department. In case of a vacancy in any office of the fire department, the board of public safety shall designate an officer of the permanent department to act in such office until a permanent replacement has been appointed. Such acting officer shall not be permanent.  (Code 1971, § 7-23) Sec. 6-96. Estimate of annual expenses for fire protection. The board of public safety shall be responsible for the preparation of the estimate of the
for the preparation of the estimate of the annual expenses of the fire department for fire protection. Such estimate shall be submitted to the mayor for his/her annual budget, and to the council.  (Code 1971, § 7-24) Sec. 6-97. Control of fire apparatus. All fire apparatus now owned by the city shall be under the control and direction of the board of public safety.  (Code 1971, § 7-25) Secs. 6-98—6-120. Reserved. PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE V.
Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE V. COMMISSION ON HISTORICAL CEMETERIES
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 9 of 31 ARTICLE V. COMMISSION ON HISTORICAL CEMETERIES6 Sec. 6-121. Established. A commission on historical cemeteries is hereby created. The name of such commission shall be "Warwick Commission on Historical Cemeteries." Such commission shall be nonpolitical.  (Code 1971, § 5-40) Sec. 6-122. Membership. The membership of the historical cemetery commission shall be composed as follows:  (1)
commission shall be composed as follows:  (1) Membership is restricted to bona fide residents of the city.  (2) Membership is restricted to a maximum of seven members. The commission shall also include two alternates, to be designated as the first and second alternate members. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second
absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning such matter.  (3) The members shall be appointed by the mayor from a group of prominent and actively interested citizens.  (Code 1971, § 5-41; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I, 4-8-96; Ord. No. O-03-13, § I, 7-21-03) Sec. 6-123. Term of office. (a) Upon passage of this article,
Term of office. (a) Upon passage of this article, the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, seven members.  (b) The mayor shall annually, in the month of January, appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, a number of members equal to the number of members whose terms expire to hold office for three years from the first Monday of January in the year of his or her appointment, and until his or her successor is chosen.  (Code 1971, § 5-42; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I,
(Code 1971, § 5-42; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I, 4-8-96) Sec. 6-124. Replacement of members for failure to attend meetings. In the event that any member of the historical cemetery commission shall be absent from three consecutive meetings, he/she may be replaced as a member of the commission. Such replacement shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and such membership shall terminate upon the appointment and confirmation of the member chosen as a replacement.   6Cross
of the member chosen as a replacement.   6Cross reference(s)—Cemeteries, ch. 12.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 10 of 31 (Code 1971, § 5-43) Sec. 6-125. Purpose. The purpose of the historical cemetery commission shall be as follows: The commission shall cause to be created an inventory of historical cemeteries within the city; formulate and develop plans and programs to restore, rehabilitate and maintain historical cemeteries; recommend to the mayor and city council such action as may be necessary to implement such plans and programs; and
to implement such plans and programs; and investigate sources of funds, including fundraising, grants and development of both corporate and individual sponsors, and all other legitimate and related activities.  (Code 1971, § 5-44) Sec. 6-126. Acceptance of support and money. The historical cemetery commission shall have the authority to accept public support and funds from individuals or others for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this article, and shall make reports of accounting
article, and shall make reports of accounting quarterly to the director of finance of the city.  (Code 1971, § 5-45) Sec. 6-127. Appropriations by city council. The city council has the authority, in its discretion, to appropriate funds necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, and to transfer such funds to the historical cemetery commission for expenditures.  (Code 1971, § 5-46) Secs. 6-128—6-150. Reserved. ARTICLE VI. HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW7 Sec. 6-151. Established; powers. There
OF REVIEW7 Sec. 6-151. Established; powers. There shall be a housing board of review, which is authorized to hear and decide appeals from compliance orders. The board shall have the power to reverse or affirm wholly or partly or to modify any order of the director; and in specific cases to authorize a variance in the application of the terms of chapter 26, where, owing to unusual conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of chapter 26 will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of chapter 26 shall be observed and substantial justice done.  (Code 1971, § 10-84)  7Cross reference(s)—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; fee for appeals before housing board of review, § 18-9.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 11 of 31 Sec. 6-152. Conditions for appeal. Any person upon whom a compliance order has been served may appeal from the compliance order to the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-85) Sec. 6-153. Application for appeal. Application for such an appeal may be made whenever it is alleged that the compliance order does not conform with the true intent of chapter 26 or of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, that the compliance order
pursuant thereto, that the compliance order is contrary to law, that the provisions of chapter 26 do not fully apply, or that in unusual conditions unnecessary hardship will result from the literal enforcement of the provisions of chapter 26. Any eligible person desiring to take an appeal shall file in the office of the board, within ten days after service of the compliance order, a written appeal including a brief statement of the reasons therefor, and a detailed statement of the facts
therefor, and a detailed statement of the facts supporting the appeal. A notice of the appeal shall be forwarded immediately to the director by the secretary of the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-86) Sec. 6-154. Appeal fee. An appeal fee, in accordance with chapter 18, shall be paid upon filing of any application for appeal before the board. Upon receipt of the appeal fee by the board, said fee shall be paid into the city treasury.  (Code 1971, § 10-87) Sec. 6-155. Effect of appeal. An appeal to the
Sec. 6-155. Effect of appeal. An appeal to the board shall stay all proceedings under the compliance order from which such appeal has been taken, except that the director may certify to the board, after receipt of the notice of the appeal, as provided in section 6-153, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, any stay of proceedings would in his/her opinion cause a direct hazard or immediate peril to the health or safety of the occupants of a dwelling or of the public, and in
occupants of a dwelling or of the public, and in such event proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order granted by the chairperson or the acting chairperson of the board on application therefor by the appellant upon notice to the director, and on due cause shown, or by a court of competent jurisdiction. Whenever a restraining order has been issued, the appeal shall be given priority over all other matters before the board, and shall be promptly heard and decided.  (Code 1971,
shall be promptly heard and decided.  (Code 1971, § 10-88) Sec. 6-156. Membership; appointment of members. The housing board of review shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. One member shall be of the minority party.  (Code 1971, § 10-89)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 12 of 31 Sec. 6-157. Term of office. One member of the board shall be appointed for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one to serve for one year, and each new member to serve for five years and until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint a member of the board to fill any unexpired term if a vacancy occurs.  (Code 1971, §
term if a vacancy occurs.  (Code 1971, § 10-90) Sec. 6-158. Qualifications of members. Each member of the board shall be a resident and qualified elector of the city, and one member shall be a qualified builder, or a licensed architect, or a licensed professional engineer. No member of the board shall serve on any other appointive board of the city.  (Code 1971, § 10-91) Sec. 6-159. Officers. The board shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson, and the board shall select one of
as chairperson, and the board shall select one of its members to serve as vice-chairperson.  (Code 1971, § 10-92) Sec. 6-160. Exemption of members from voting. No member of the board shall pass on any matter in which he/she has a business or personal interest.  (Code 1971, § 10-93) Sec. 6-161. Notice of meeting. The board shall meet at least once a month and at other times upon the call of the chairperson. Notice of the meeting to hear an appeal shall be given the appellant, the director, and
shall be given the appellant, the director, and the members of the board, at least ten days before the holding of the meeting, except for a hearing on an appeal involving a restraining order, at which time notice need not exceed 48 hours. Upon receipt of notice of an appeal the director shall forward immediately to the chairperson of the board all pertinent records.  (Code 1971, § 10-95) Sec. 6-162. Quorum for hearing appeal. In order for the board to hear an appeal, a quorum of three members
to hear an appeal, a quorum of three members of the board must be present. When a quorum is not present, the hearing of the appeal shall be postponed until such time as a quorum is present. The board shall provide for a new date for the hearing of the appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 6-161.  (Code 1971, § 10-96)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 13 of 31 Sec. 6-163. Proceedings. All hearings of the housing board of review shall be de novo. All hearings shall be public, and the appellant, his/her representative, the director and any other person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal, and who files a written entry of appearance, shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Written entry of appearance at such hearing shall fulfill the requirements for service of
shall fulfill the requirements for service of any notice or order by the director. The chairperson, or, in his/her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Proceedings of the board shall be conclusive with respect to questions of fact and may be reviewed only on questions of law by courts of competent jurisdiction as provided in section 6-166.  (Code 1971, § 10-97) Sec. 6-164. Majority vote required. A concurring vote of a majority of the
required. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board present at the hearing shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order or decision of the director, and to authorize a variance in the application of any of the provisions of chapter 26 as provided in section 6-151. In the event of a tie vote of the members of the board present at the hearing, the order or decision of the director shall be deemed to have been sustained.  (Code 1971, § 10-98) Sec. 6-165. Records; notice of
1971, § 10-98) Sec. 6-165. Records; notice of decisions. All decisions of the board shall be in writing. The board shall keep clear and detailed minutes of all its proceedings, including its decisions and the reasons therefor and the vote of each member participating therein and the absence of a member or his/her failure to vote. Such record, immediately following the board's decision, shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. Notice of the board's decision shall
record. Notice of the board's decision shall be promptly furnished to the appellant, to his/her representative, to any person who has filed a written entry of appearance, and to the director, and the director shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-99) Sec. 6-166. Court review of decisions. Any person, including the director, aggrieved by a decision of the housing board of review may present to the supreme court a petition duly verified
to the supreme court a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the housing board of review to review such decision of the board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return
prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made, which shall be not less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may on application, upon notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of
to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. If upon the hearing it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a master to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with
may direct and report the same to the court with his/her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision brought up for review.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 14 of 31 (Code 1971, § 10-100) Secs. 6-167—6-190. Reserved. ARTICLE VII. JUVENILE HEARING BOARD Sec. 6-191. Established. There is hereby established within the city a juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this article for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such board by the chief of the police department, with respect to persons resident in the city, under the age of 18 years, who are charged with violating the
of 18 years, who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the state or the city.  (Code 1971, § 2-121) Sec. 6-192. Referral of offenders to board. (a) Any person who is a resident of the city and under the age of 18 years who allegedly shall have committed a juvenile offense which if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor may request a hearing before the juvenile hearing board rather than being referred to the family court; provided, however, that said referral to the juvenile
however, that said referral to the juvenile hearing board is made with the approval of the chief of police of the city; and further provided that referral to said juvenile hearing board shall not be offered to any juvenile:  (1) Who has been charged with the crime of assault or battery, unless specifically approved by the chief of police of the city;  (2) Who shall have been twice previously referred to said board or who shall have been once previously referred to said board and refused or
previously referred to said board and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to make the restitution recommended by said board; or  (3) Who at the time of commission of such juvenile offense was within the custody and control of family court, not to include guardianship matters.  (b) The chief of police may offer referral to the juvenile hearing board to any other juvenile offender where, in the opinion of the chief of police, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile
such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. No referral to said board shall be made by the chief of police until such person, together with his/her legal guardians, shall have, in writing, waived such person's right to a hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, shall have admitted guilt to the offense charged, and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of said board; provided, however, that failure to comply with the
however, that failure to comply with the decision of said board may result in the referral of said juvenile to the family court by the chief of police.  (Code 1971, § 2-122) Sec. 6-193. Refusal of referral. The board, after investigation, may refuse to hear any case in which it appears that a juvenile was wrongfully referred in violation of section 6-192. In addition, the board may refuse to hear any case in which the juvenile refuses to supply the board with requested information, fails to
the board with requested information, fails to appear when requested or refuses to cooperate with the proceedings of the board. The board shall immediately notify the chief of police, in writing, of any case
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 15 of 31 which it refuses to hear, and the chief of police shall take whatever further action that is deemed necessary, including referral to the family court.  (Code 1971, § 2-123) Sec. 6-194. Legal representation of offenders. Any juvenile offender shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and present evidence at said hearing. Said legal representation shall be at the offender's own expense.  (Code 1971, § 2-124) Sec. 6-195.
own expense.  (Code 1971, § 2-124) Sec. 6-195. Powers and duties; imposition of sanctions. (a) The board shall hear all cases referred to it by the chief of police and shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and shall direct restitution for any injuries resulting from the commission of such offense.  (b) Sanctions imposed by the board shall be for a period of time not to exceed six months and may consist of, but shall not be limited to, public service, referral to counseling,
to, public service, referral to counseling, curfews, restrictions on association with other offenders, restrictions on employment, and fines not to exceed $100.00, or any combination of the above.  (c) In those cases in which the board shall order restitution, it shall attempt to assist the offender and his/her parents in providing a means whereby the offender may make such restitution. In ordering restitution, the board shall take into account the offender's ability to pay and the amount of
the offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damages caused as a result of the commission of such offense.  (d) In any proceeding, the board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his/her parents to agree to the sanctions imposed and to agree to the amount of restitution and manner of making the same. In imposing sanctions or ordering restitution, the board shall consider the nature of the offense, the prior record of the offender, and any mitigating
prior record of the offender, and any mitigating circumstances involved.  (e) The board shall have the right to levy hearing costs.  (Code 1971, § 2-125) Sec. 6-196. Meetings and rules of procedure. (a) The board shall meet not less than once each month; however, the board shall not be required to meet if there are no pending cases before it and no cases currently referred to it by the chief of police. It shall give written notice of the matters to be heard before it to the chief of police, the
to be heard before it to the chief of police, the juvenile officer, and the juvenile offender and his/her parents, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall set forth the nature of the offense, the time and place of the hearing, and the offender's right to be represented by counsel at the offender's expense.  (b) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be closed to the public. The board shall elect one of its
to the public. The board shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and one as its vice-chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. The board shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules theretofore adopted, with the approval of the chief of police, and not inconsistent with this article.  (Code
and not inconsistent with this article.  (Code 1971, § 2-126; Ord. No. O-16-20, § I, 8-17-16)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 16 of 31 Sec. 6-197. Membership; term of office. (a) The membership of the board shall consist of seven persons over the age of 18 years, to be appointed by the city council, all of whom shall have been residents for at least three years within the city, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state, and none shall be an elected official in any capacity in any city or town. The city
in any capacity in any city or town. The city council shall appoint one member whose term shall expire on December 1, 1992, and thereafter until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, three members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1993, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified, and three members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1994, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. During the month of November and annually
During the month of November and annually thereafter, the city council shall appoint a member or members to succeed the member or members whose terms will then next expire, to serve for a term of three years, commencing on December 1, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment, but only for the remainder
original appointment, but only for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the board. An attorney may be appointed to the board as an ex officio member by the chief judge of the family court.  (b) The composition of the board shall consist of citizens of the city who have a background in and of the related fields of education, probation and parole, human services, or community youth
and parole, human services, or community youth programs, members of the clergy, former law enforcement or judicial officials or any citizens whom the council deems have the credentials that would be an asset to the board.  (Code 1971, § 2-127) Sec. 6-198. Effective date. This article shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense after July 12, 1992.  (Code 1971, § 2-128) Secs. 6-199—6-220. Reserved. ARTICLE VIII. PERSONNEL HEARING BOARD8 Sec. 6-221. Established; membership;
BOARD8 Sec. 6-221. Established; membership; term of office. There is hereby established a personnel hearing board to consist of three qualified electors of the city who shall be known to be in sympathy with the application of modern personnel practices, under a merit system of personnel administration in the public service, and not more than two of whom shall be members of the same political party. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. Each member shall be appointed for a
the mayor. Each member shall be appointed for a term of six years commencing on the expiration of the terms of the present members as follows: one in December 1994, one in December 1996, and one in January 1998. A vacancy, whatever the circumstances of its creation, shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, within 60 days and only for the unexpired portion of the term.   8Cross reference(s)—Personnel merit system, ch. 48.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 17 of 31 (Code 1971, § 14-22) Sec. 6-222. Organization; meetings; quorum; compensation of members. The personnel hearing board shall elect one of its members chairperson. Each member shall take the oath of office before entering upon the duties of office. Members of the board shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses and each member of the board shall be paid a sum to be determined by the council. The board shall
to be determined by the council. The board shall meet at such times and places as shall be specified by call of the chairperson or the mayor. Notice of each meeting shall be given in writing to each member. Two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  (Code 1971, § 14-23) Sec. 6-223. Removal of members. A member of the personnel hearing board shall be subject to removal by the mayor as provided in section 3-3 of the Charter.  (Code 1971, § 14-24) Sec. 6-224. Appeals
(Code 1971, § 14-24) Sec. 6-224. Appeals to board. The personnel hearing board shall hear appeals:  (1) By any person holding full status in the classified service aggrieved by action of the chief of the division of personnel on matters of personnel administration.  (2) By any person holding full status in the classified service who has been discharged, demoted, suspended or laid off by any appointing authority.  (3) By any person who holds the belief that he/she has been discriminated against
belief that he/she has been discriminated against because of his/her race, color, creed, national origin, religious or political opinions, handicap, sex, or affiliations in any personnel action. Such appeals shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of chapter 48 or the personnel rules.  (Code 1971, § 14-25) Sec. 6-225. Members not to run for or hold elective office. No member of the personnel hearing board shall seek the nomination of or be a candidate for any elective office; neither
be a candidate for any elective office; neither shall any elective officer be appointed a member of the personnel hearing board unless he/she resigns his/her elective office.  (Code 1971, § 14-82) Secs. 6-226—6-240. Reserved. PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE IX. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1992)
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 18 of 31 ARTICLE IX. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1992)9 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 6-241. Administration and general responsibility for retirement system. The general administration and the responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of article II of chapter 60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.
60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-114) Sec. 6-242. Membership. The membership of the retirement board shall consist of:  (1) The director of finance, ex officio.  (2) The chief of personnel, ex officio.  (3) The chairperson of the city council finance committee, ex officio.  (4) The president of the municipal employees bargaining unit, ex officio.  (5) Three members to be elected within 60 days following the effective date of Ordinance No. O-70-9 for a term expiring
date of Ordinance No. O-70-9 for a term expiring June 30, 1973, providing:  a. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who also hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as designated by the state labor relations board for collective bargaining purposes with a participating employer. Such member shall hold office only while a member of both the retirement system and appropriate bargaining unit.  b. One of the three members shall
unit.  b. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who are also retirants of the system. Such member shall hold office only while a member of the retirement system as a retirement.  c. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who does not hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as described above and who is not a retirant. Such member shall hold office only while a member of
member shall hold office only while a member of the retirement system.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms of three years beginning July 1, 1970, and each three years thereafter.   9Cross reference(s)—Retirement system, ch. 60.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 19 of 31 (6) Four members who shall not be officers or employees of the city. When this article becomes effective, the mayor shall appoint two members for a term of one year, one for a term of two years and one for a term of three years. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term of three years from the date of expiration of the term for which his/her predecessor was appointed.  (Code 1971, § 16-115) Sec. 6-243. Filling of
(Code 1971, § 16-115) Sec. 6-243. Filling of vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the office of a retirement board member, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled.  (Code 1971, § 16-116) Sec. 6-244. Voting. Each board member shall be entitled to one vote on the board. An affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present shall be necessary for a decision by the members at any meeting of the board. The presence of six
at any meeting of the board. The presence of six members of the retirement board shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting business at any meeting.  (Code 1971, § 16-118; Ord. No. O-09-24, § I, 9-15-09) Sec. 6-245. Jurisdiction. The retirement board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in all matters relating to or affecting the funds provided for in this article and article II of chapter 60, including, in addition to all other matters, all claims for benefits and refunds
matters, all claims for benefits and refunds under article II of chapter 60, and its action, decisions or determinations in any matter shall be reviewable according to law.  (Code 1971, § 16-119) Sec. 6-246. Establishment of regulations for administration of retirement system; other functions of board. Subject to the limitations of this article and article II of chapter 60, the retirement board shall, from time to time, establish rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by
for the administration of funds created by this law, for the transaction of its business and for the limitation of the time within which claims may be filed and for the administration and transaction of the business of the retirement system, and shall perform such other functions as are required for the execution of this article and article II of chapter 60.  (Code 1971, § 16-120) Sec. 6-247. Officers. The retirement board shall elect a chairperson from its membership by majority vote. The
from its membership by majority vote. The chief of personnel shall be the secretary of the retirement board, but he/she may appoint an employee of the retirement system to perform necessary duties of the position.  (Code 1971, § 16-121)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 20 of 31 Sec. 6-248. Payment of expenses. All necessary expenses of the retirement board and the staff of the retirement system shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the retirement board shall approve.  (Code 1971, § 16-122) Sec. 6-249. Employees of retirement system. The mayor shall appoint all employees of the retirement system of the city and direct their work in accordance with the policy and rules established by the
with the policy and rules established by the retirement board. The compensation of all persons so appointed shall be paid in accordance with the comprehensive compensation plan of the city. Appointment to positions created as a result of this article shall be made in accordance with the merit system ordinance.  (Code 1971, § 16-123) Sec. 6-250. Authority to engage actuarial, investment and other services. The retirement board may engage such actuarial, investment, administrative and other
actuarial, investment, administrative and other services as may be required or deemed advisable to transact the business of the retirement system.  (Code 1971, § 16-124) Sec. 6-251. Collection of data for evaluation. The staff of the employee retirement system under the direction of the chief of personnel shall keep in convenient form such data as shall be necessary for actuarial evaluation of the liabilities of the retirement system and for checking the experience of the system.  (Code 1971, §
the experience of the system.  (Code 1971, § 16-125) Sec. 6-252. Records; annual report. The secretary of the retirement board shall be responsible for keeping a record of all its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection. He/she shall publish annually a report approved by the retirement board showing, for the fiscal year, the amount of the accumulated cash financial conditions of the system by means of an actuarial evaluation of the assets and liabilities of the retirement system.
assets and liabilities of the retirement system.  (Code 1971, § 16-126) Sec. 6-253. Duties of city solicitor. The city solicitor shall be the legal adviser and counsel of the retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-127)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 21 of 31 Sec. 6-254. Medical board. The retirement board shall designate a medical board to be composed of three physicians who shall arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under the provisions of article II of chapter 60, shall investigate all essential statements and certificates made by or on behalf of a member in connection with an application for disability retirement and shall report in writing to the
retirement and shall report in writing to the retirement board its conclusions and recommendations upon all the matters referred to it.  (Code 1971, § 16-128) Sec. 6-255. Recommendation of changes in retirement system due to changes in Social Security Act. Whenever the maximum earnings base for taxes and benefits under the federal Social Security Act is changed in the future, the retirement board shall study the effect on total contributions and total benefits provided by the federal Social
and total benefits provided by the federal Social Security Act and by this retirement system and shall make recommendations as to the desirability of changes in the retirement system to the city council.  (Code 1971, § 16-129) Sec. 6-256. Limitation on administrative powers and duties. Except as provided in this article and article II of chapter 60, the retirement board shall have no administrative powers or duties.  (Code 1971, § 16-130) Secs. 6-257—6-270. Reserved. DIVISION 2. ACTUARIAL
6-257—6-270. Reserved. DIVISION 2. ACTUARIAL SERVICES Sec. 6-271. Actuary to be technical adviser; qualifications. The actuary shall be the technical adviser of the retirement board on matters regarding the operation of the funds created by this article and article II of chapter 60, and shall perform such other duties as are required in connection therewith. He/she shall be a qualified member as a Fellow of the Society of Actuaries.  (Code 1971, § 16-141) Sec. 6-272. Actuarial investigation to
§ 16-141) Sec. 6-272. Actuarial investigation to be performed every three years. The retirement board shall have made at least every three years an actuarial investigation into the mortality, service and compensation experiences of the members, retirants, and beneficiaries of the retirement system and, taking into account the results of such investigation and valuation, the retirement board shall establish for the retirement system such mortality, service and other tables as shall be deemed
service and other tables as shall be deemed necessary.  (Code 1971, § 16-142)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 22 of 31 Sec. 6-273. Annual evaluation of assets and liabilities. On the basis of tables arrived at pursuant to the actuarial investigation as the retirement board shall adopt, it shall make an annual evaluation of the assets and liabilities of the fund of the retirement system. The assets used for such evaluation shall equal the lesser of the asset value before adjustment and the market value of assets, including any accrued
the market value of assets, including any accrued contributions.  (Code 1971, § 16-143) Sec. 6-274. Certification of rates of contribution payable by employer. On the basis of the annual evaluation performed pursuant to this division, the retirement board shall certify the rates of contribution payable by the employers.  (Code 1971, § 16-144) Sec. 6-275. Determination of asset value before adjustment and market value of assets; establishment of adjustment ratio. On each January 31 from 1985
of adjustment ratio. On each January 31 from 1985 through 1988, on June 30, 1988, and on each subsequent June 30, the asset value before adjustment and the market value of assets shall be determined. If the market value of assets exceeds the asset value before adjustment by an amount equal to six percent or more of the actuarial accrued liability of the benefits of all retired employees and beneficiaries, then an adjustment to the monthly benefit is warranted. An increase in monthly benefits
is warranted. An increase in monthly benefits may be granted, such that the increase in actuarial accrued liability does not exceed one-third of the amount by which the market value of assets exceeded the asset value before adjustment and such that the average increase in monthly benefits does not exceed the sum of the negotiated increases in base wages covered under the collective bargaining agreement effective during the 12-month period beginning on the July 1 immediately prior to the
beginning on the July 1 immediately prior to the effective date of increase in monthly benefits. If an increase in the monthly benefits is granted, then the adjustment referred to in "asset value after adjustment" shall equal two times the actuarial accrued liability of the increase in monthly benefits.  (Code 1971, § 16-145) Secs. 6-276—6-290. Reserved. DIVISION 3. INVESTMENT OF TRUST FUNDS Sec. 6-291. Board designated trustee of funds; powers and duties. The retirement board shall be the
and duties. The retirement board shall be the trustees of the funds created by this article and article II of chapter 60 and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such funds, subject to all the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by law upon a corporate trustee in the state in making and disposing of its investments, and subject to like terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions said retirement board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer
power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer or dispose of any of the securities and investments in which any of the funds created in this article and article II of chapter 60 shall have been invested, as well as of the proceeds of said investments and any moneys belonging to said funds.  (Code 1971, § 16-156)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 23 of 31 Sec. 6-292. Fiduciary role of members and employees of retirement system with regard to funds. Except as provided in this article and article II of chapter 60, no member of and no employee of the retirement system shall have any direct interest in the gains or profits of any investment made by the retirement board, nor as such receive any pay or emolument for his/her services. No member of the board or employee of the
No member of the board or employee of the retirement system shall directly or indirectly for himself/herself or as an agent in any manner use the assets of the retirement system except to make such current and necessary payments as are authorized by the retirement board, nor shall any member or employee of the retirement system become an endorser or surety or become in any manner an obligor for moneys loaned by or borrowed from the retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-157) Sec. 6-293. Group
board.  (Code 1971, § 16-157) Sec. 6-293. Group annuity contract purchase authorized. The retirement board is hereby authorized and empowered to apply for and purchase from an insurance company, authorized to transact business in the state, a group annuity contract, in form approved by said retirement board, for the purpose of providing benefits to members of the retirement system, as defined by article II of chapter 60. Such group annuity contract may contain a provision for establishing
contract may contain a provision for establishing separate accounts funding for the purpose of allocating thereto amounts paid to the insurer by the retirement board in connection with the retirement system for the future payment of retirement benefits in guaranteed fixed amounts.  (Code 1971, § 16-158) Secs. 6-294—6-310. Reserved. ARTICLE X. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1992) Sec. 6-311. Established; responsibility for administration of plan; membership; voting; officers. (a)
of plan; membership; voting; officers. (a) Board established; general duties. The general administration and the responsibility for the proper operation of the plan and for making effective the provisions of article III of chapter 60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.  (b) Membership. The membership of the retirement board shall consist of:  (1) The city's finance director ex officio;  (2) The city's personnel chief ex officio;  (3) The chairperson of the city council finance committee ex
of the city council finance committee ex officio;  (4) The president of the union ex officio;  (5) Three members to be elected for a term expiring June 30, 1994, providing:  a. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who also hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as designated by the state labor relations board for collective bargaining purposes with the city. Such member shall hold office only while a member of both the plan and the
only while a member of both the plan and the appropriate bargaining unit.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 24 of 31 b. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who are retirees. Such member shall hold office only while a retiree.  c. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who does not hold membership in the union as described above and who is not a retiree. Such member shall hold office only while a member of the plan.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms
plan.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms of three years beginning July 1, 1994, and each three years thereafter.  (6) Four members who shall not be employees of the city shall be appointed for terms of three years from the date of expiration of the term for which the predecessor of each member was appointed.  (c) Filling of vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the office of a retirement board member, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was
term in the same manner as the office was previously filled.  (d) Voting. Each retirement board member shall be entitled to one vote on the board. An affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present shall be necessary for a decision by the members at any meeting of the board. The presence of six members of the retirement board shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting business at any meeting.  (e) Officers. The retirement board shall elect a chairperson from its
board shall elect a chairperson from its membership by majority vote. The chief of personnel shall be the secretary of the retirement board, but he or she may appoint an employee of the plan to perform necessary duties of the position.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.1), 12-13-93; Ord. No. O-09-25, § I, 9-15-09) Sec. 6-312. Powers and duties. (a) Jurisdiction. The retirement board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in all matters relating to or affecting the funds provided for in this article
affecting the funds provided for in this article and article III of chapter 60, including, in addition to all other matters, all claims for benefits and refunds under this article and article III of chapter 60, and its action, decisions or determinations in any matter shall be reviewable according to law.  (b) Authority to establish regulations for administration of plan. Subject to the limitations of this article and article III of chapter 60, the retirement board shall, from time to time,
the retirement board shall, from time to time, establish rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by this law, for the transaction of its business and for the limitation of the time within which claims may be filed and for the administration and transaction of the business of the plan, and shall perform such other functions as are required for the execution of this article and article III of chapter 60.  (c) Payment of expenses. All necessary expenses of the retirement
All necessary expenses of the retirement board and the staff of the plan shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the retirement board shall approve.  (d) Limitation on administrative powers and duties. Except as provided in this article and article III of chapter 60, the retirement board shall have no administrative powers or duties.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.2), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-313. Records; annual report. The secretary of the retirement board shall be responsible for keeping a
board shall be responsible for keeping a record of all its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection. He or she shall publish annually a report approved by the retirement board showing the financial condition of the fund.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 25 of 31 (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.3), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-314. Duties of city solicitor. The city solicitor shall be the legal adviser and counsel of the retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.4), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-315. Amendment of plan. The city council shall have the right to amend the plan. The plan may not be altered or amended without consultation between the city council and the retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.5),
retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.5), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-316. Designation of beneficiary by members of plan. After joining the plan in accordance with section 60-341, each member shall designate, on such forms as are acceptable to the retirement board, one or more individuals, estates or trusts as his or her beneficiary under the plan, including contingent beneficiaries. The member may change his or her designated beneficiary at any time prior to retirement.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, §
time prior to retirement.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.6), 12-13-93; Ord. No. O-98-43, § I, 12-14-98) Sec. 6-317. Group annuity contract purchase authorized. The retirement board is hereby authorized and empowered to apply for and purchase from an insurance company, authorized to transact business in the state, a group annuity contract, in form approved by said retirement board, for the purpose of providing benefits to members of the plan. Such group annuity contract may contain a provision for
annuity contract may contain a provision for establishing separate accounts funding for the purpose of allocating thereto amounts paid to the insurer by the retirement board in connection with the plan for the future payment of retirement benefits in guaranteed fixed amounts.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.7), 12-13-93) Secs. 6-318—6-340. Reserved. ARTICLE XI. SEWER BOARD OF REVIEW10  10Cross reference(s)—Sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 66.  State law reference(s)—Creation of sewer board of review
reference(s)—Creation of sewer board of review for city, and authority thereunder, P.L. 1962, ch. 254, § 19.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 26 of 31 Sec. 6-341. Powers and duties. The city sewer board of review shall have all the powers and duties hereinafter set out and as prescribed in P.L. 1962, ch. 254, as amended.  (Code 1971, § 18-16) Sec. 6-342. Officers. The sewer board of review shall elect from among its members a chairperson and a secretary at the first meeting after the organization and upon the appointment of any new member for a full term, and shall fill any
new member for a full term, and shall fill any vacancy that may occur in either office from any cause.  (Code 1971, § 18-17) Sec. 6-343. Clerk. The sewer board of review may appoint a clerk, who shall perform such administrative duties as may be prescribed by the board as well as all other duties prescribed by law.  (Code 1971, § 18-18) Sec. 6-344. Meetings. Meetings of the sewer board of review shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The
such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson may administer oaths.  (Code 1971, § 18-19) Sec. 6-345. Quorum. The presence of all three members shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the sewer board of review.  (Code 1971, § 18-20) Sec. 6-346. Hearings to be public; notice of hearings. All hearings of the sewer board of review shall be open to the public. At least five days prior to the date scheduled for a hearing, notice shall be mailed to the
for a hearing, notice shall be mailed to the petitioner, and a copy of same shall be forwarded to the city sewer authority. In case of continuances of public hearings, notice of this fact must be sent to the petitioner and the city sewer authority.  (Code 1971, § 18-21) Sec. 6-347. Minutes and other records. The sewer board of review shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if such member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and
or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 27 of 31 examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be a public record.  (Code 1971, § 18-22) Sec. 6-348. Time limit for filing appeals. Within 60 days after mailing of notice of an assessment or charge under section 9 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter 254, or within 30 days after giving or mailing of notice of an order under section 17 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter
under section 17 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter 254, any person aggrieved by such assessment, charge or order may appeal to the sewer board of review.  (Code 1971, § 18-23) Sec. 6-349. Appeals to be in writing; timely filing. Appeals must be in writing on forms provided by the sewer board of review and shall be filed in the office of the board within the times specified above.  (Code 1971, § 18-24) Sec. 6-350. Docketing of appeals; order of hearing; hearing continued matters. All appeals filed
hearing continued matters. All appeals filed with the sewer board of review shall be numbered, docketed and assigned by the clerk for hearing in the order in which received. All continued matters shall be heard prior to the matters docketed at any meeting.  (Code 1971, § 18-25) Sec. 6-351. Determination of number of appeals to be heard at each meeting. The sewer board of review shall determine the number of appeals that may be assigned for hearing to any particular meeting.  (Code 1971, §
hearing to any particular meeting.  (Code 1971, § 18-26) Sec. 6-352. Powers regarding appeals. The sewer board of review shall have power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an assessment, charge or order of the city sewer authority is unwarranted in whole or in part, and shall annul or modify the same and make such order as justice may require. Otherwise it shall affirm the same.  (Code 1971, § 18-27) Sec. 6-353. Executive session; deferment of decision; majority vote required.
deferment of decision; majority vote required. The merits of any petition may be discussed by the sewer board of review in executive session; provided, however, that all decisions of the board shall be made in open session. The board in its discretion may reserve consideration and decision to a later date. All decisions shall be made by majority vote.  (Code 1971, § 18-28)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 28 of 31 Sec. 6-354. Notice of decision. Notice of the sewer board's decision shall be sent to the petitioner and a copy of same forwarded to the city sewer authority.  (Code 1971, § 18-29) Sec. 6-355. Filing new petition for same premises or subject matter. No new petition pertaining to the same premises or subject matter involved in a decision of the sewer board of review may be heard until the expiration of two years from the date
until the expiration of two years from the date of such decision.  (Code 1971, § 18-30) Secs. 6-356—6-380. Reserved. ARTICLE XII. TREE COMMISSION11 Sec. 6-381. Jurisdiction; duties. (a) The city tree commission, hereinafter referenced as the "commission," shall have jurisdiction over all forestry functions, including the planting, care and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants, on the properties for which it is responsible. The commission shall do all acts necessary and proper for the care,
do all acts necessary and proper for the care, management, improvement, maintenance and protection of the public park and street trees under its jurisdiction.  (b) The duties of the commission shall be interpreted to include, but not be limited to, the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees on public property, and making such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the city.  (Code 1971, §
and activities for the city.  (Code 1971, § 25-3) Sec. 6-382. Appointment and qualifications of tree warden. The tree warden shall be appointed by the city tree commission. This person shall have training and experience in arboriculture and shall have passed the state arborist exam.  (Code 1971, § 25-4(a)) Secs. 6-383—6-400. Reserved.  11Cross reference(s)—Trees, ch. 78.  PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE XIII. RESERVED
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 29 of 31 ARTICLE XIII. RESERVED12 Secs. 6-401—6-419. Reserved. ARTICLE XIV. RESERVED13 Secs. 6-420—6-439. Reserved. ARTICLE XV. AIRPORT LAND USE COMMISSIONS Sec. 6-440. Statement of purpose. The city desires to be a good neighbor with the T.F. Green State Airport in promoting its economic vitality, and in promoting the use and enjoyment of said airport for our citizens.  At the same time, the
airport for our citizens.  At the same time, the city recognizes the adverse impact that the expansion of T.F. Green Airport has had to our surrounding neighborhoods. The city further recognizes that this problem is significant and has far reaching implications including, but not limited to, the following:  (1) It adversely impacts the health, safety and welfare of the residents surrounding the airport;  (2) It reduces the fair market value of homes in the city;  (3) Vital tax dollars are lost
in the city;  (3) Vital tax dollars are lost in perpetuity to the city when homes and land are purchased by the state airport corporation, which is a tax exempt entity;  (4) The haphazard purchase of property around T.F. Green based on noise contour lines creates an inefficient land-use pattern in and around the airport;  (5) It threatens our economic vitality by placing an increased tax burden on the remaining commercial and residential property owners;  (6) It destroys the intrinsic visual
owners;  (6) It destroys the intrinsic visual beauty of the landscape; and  (7) It increases traffic, increases noise and air pollution, creates safety concerns, and leads to deteriorating roadways.   12Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. O-13-7, § I, adopted June 12, 2013, repealed §§ 6-401—6-405, which pertained to growth management coordinating council and derived from Ord. No. O-00-11, § I, 4-11-00; Ord. No. O-01-23, § I, 12-26-01.  13Editor's note(s)—Ordinance No. O-02-18, § I, adopted August 13,
No. O-02-18, § I, adopted August 13, 2002, repealed §§ 6-420—6-427 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to juvenile hearing board for truancy and derived from Ord. No. O-97-25, § I, 11-10-97.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 30 of 31 Therefore, it is clear that in order to protect the quality of life around T.F. Green Airport, city officials must work to develop effective mechanisms to control airport expansion in and around T.F. Green Airport.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-441. Creation of airport land use commission. There is hereby established a neighborhood buyout commission, which shall act as an advisory commission to city officials and
as an advisory commission to city officials and as a liaison between and among the state airport corporation, the community noise advisory committee, and the citizens of the city in order to develop a framework for coordinated and consistent planning for the control and development of land use patterns in and around the airport.  The commission will also consider initiatives that will enable the city to lay a realistic foundation for sustainable growth of T.F. Green Airport while protecting the
growth of T.F. Green Airport while protecting the quality of life for residents of the city. These initiatives should include, but are not limited to:  (1) Promoting greater citizen involvement in the planning process around the airport;  (2) Examining initiatives for alleviating noise and air pollution for neighborhoods surrounding the airport;  (3) If neighborhoods so desire, assisting them in marketing their land as a whole in order to increase the fair market value of their individual
the fair market value of their individual properties which may include assistance with comprehensive plan amendments and/or zone changes;  (4) Examining the city's infrastructure capacity and setting guidelines for future expansion of T.F. Green Airport, including the development of noise compatibility overlay zones;  (5) Promoting an active approach to the acquisition of land for open space and recreation to act as buffer zones between the airport and residential neighborhoods, and  (6) To
and residential neighborhoods, and  (6) To work with neighborhood residents, whose properties are being bought out and RIAC to address the following concerns:  a. Establishing a written time table which residents can rely upon to determine when individual homes will be purchased;  b. Providing the residents with information as to how the fair market value of their homes and property will be determined; and  c. Providing residents with an informational booklet as to their rights and
an informational booklet as to their rights and responsibilities pursuant to the buyout program.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-442. Members. The membership of the commission shall be the following:  (1) Each member of the city council;  (2) The director of the planning department of the city or his or her designee who shall attend each meeting of the commission;  (3) The city council constituent liaison who shall attend each meeting of the commission and be a non-voting member of the
the commission and be a non-voting member of the commission;
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 31 of 31 (4) The Executive Director of the Rhode Island Airport Corporation, or his or her designee, who shall be a non-voting member of the commission; and  (5) Two citizens of the City of Warwick who shall be appointed by the president of the city council.  No member of the commission shall receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the commission.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-04-1, § I, 2-10-04;
§ I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-04-1, § I, 2-10-04; Ord. No. O-05-17, § I, 6-22-05; Ord. No. O-08-9, § I, 3-11-08) Sec. 6-443. Funding. Funding for the commission shall be in such amounts as may be determined by the city council and the mayor for the purposes set forth herein from year to year.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-444. Meetings and rules of procedure. (a) The commission shall meet once each quarter, and shall comply with the provisions of the open meetings law. A meeting may also
of the open meetings law. A meeting may also be called by the chairperson of the commission.  (b) Four of the members of said commission shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be open to the public. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and one of its members as its vice-chairperson, who shall serve for a term of one year each. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding
the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the voting members present shall be required to take any action. Any member wishing to place a matter on the agenda for consideration and/or discussion by the commission at a future meeting, shall submit a brief description of the matter in writing to the chairperson or vice-chairperson no less than 48 hours prior to said meeting. The commission shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or
time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules thereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this section.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-05-17, § II, 6-22-05)
Warwick (/ˈwɒrɪk/ WORR-ik or /ˈwɔːrwɪk/ WOR-wik[5]) is a city in Kent County, Rhode Island, United States, and is the third-largest city in the state, with a population of 82,823 at the 2020 census. Warwick is located approximately 12 miles (19 km) south of downtown Providence, Rhode Island, 63 miles (101 km) southwest of Boston, Massachusetts, and 171 miles (275 km) northeast of New York City.
Warwick was founded by Samuel Gorton in 1642 and has witnessed major events in American history. It was decimated during King Philip's War (1675–1676) and was the site of the Gaspee Affair, the first act of armed resistance against the British, preceding even the Boston Tea Party, and a significant prelude to the American Revolution. Warwick was also the home of Revolutionary War General Nathanael Greene, George Washington's second-in-command, and Civil War General George S. Greene, a hero of
and Civil War General George S. Greene, a hero of the Battle of Gettysburg.
Today, it is home to Rhode Island's main airport, T. F. Green Airport, which serves the Providence area and also functions as a reliever for Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts. Warwick was also home to Rocky Point, which closed in 1995 and is now a state park.
Warwick was settled by Samuel Gorton in 1642. Narragansett Sachem Miantonomi sold him the Shawhomett Purchase for 144 fathoms of wampum. This included the towns of Coventry and West Warwick, Rhode Island. However, Sachems Sacononoco and Pumham claimed that Miantonomi had sold the land without asking for their approval. They took their case to Boston, where they placed their lands under Massachusetts rule. In 1643, Massachusetts Bay Colony sent a militia force to Shawomett to arrest Gorton and
a militia force to Shawomett to arrest Gorton and his followers. After a tense standoff, all but three of the Gortonists surrendered to the Massachusetts forces. Gorton then sailed back to England and sought a charter from the King. He was greatly assisted in gaining it by Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick, so Gorton and his fellow settlers changed the name of their colony from Shawumet to Warwick.[6]
The ongoing harassment from Massachusetts Bay Colony, however, caused the other three colonies on Narragansett Bay (Providence Plantations, Portsmouth, and Newport) to unite with Warwick and get a British royal charter allowing them to form the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.[7]: 302
In 1772, Warwick was the scene of the first violent act against the British Crown in the Gaspee Affair. Local patriots boarded the Gaspee,[8] a revenue cutter that enforced the Stamp Act 1765 and Townshend Acts in Narragansett Bay. It was here that the first blood was spilled in the American Revolution when Gaspee's commanding officer Lt. Dudingston was shot and seriously wounded during the struggle for the ship. The Gaspee was stripped of all cannons and arms, then burned.[9]
During the Revolution, Warwick militiamen participated in the battles of Montreal, Quebec, Saratoga, Monmouth, and Trenton, and they were present for the British surrender at Yorktown in 1781.
Major traversing highways include:
Major traversing highways include:
Interstate 95 is the major thoroughfare of Rhode Island, with the first southbound exit in Warwick at Jefferson Boulevard, and ending with the Route 117 interchange, near the Apponaug rotaries. Interstate 295 connects to the main highway at exit 27, providing direct travel to Woonsocket and Massachusetts. Smaller routes include Route 37 (Lincoln Avenue Freeway) connecting 295 to U.S. Route 1, and the Airport Connector Road.
The Rhode Island T. F. Green International Airport is the main airport serving Rhode Island, and is located in Warwick. The name was changed from T.F. Green Airport in 2021.[10] T. F. Green Airport is a station on the Providence/Stoughton Commuter Rail Line, providing weekday service to Providence Station and Boston's South Station.[11]
Warwick is located at 41°43′N 71°25′W﻿ / ﻿41.717°N 71.417°W﻿ / 41.717; -71.417 (41.7181, −71.4152).[17]
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 49.6 square miles (128 km2), of which 35.5 square miles (92 km2)  is land and 14.1 square miles (37 km2)  (28.46%) is water. Warwick's entire eastern edge is waterfront, starting with the Providence River at its northern border with Cranston. Conimicut Point marks the end of the river and the beginning of Narragansett Bay, which extends beyond the city's southern limit on its way to the Atlantic Ocean; two southern
on its way to the Atlantic Ocean; two southern Warwick peninsulas, Warwick Neck and Potowomut, enclose the water to form Greenwich Bay.
Warwick is bordered by Cranston to the north, West Warwick to the west, and East Greenwich to the south. The city's southernmost neighborhood, Potowomut, is a semi-exclave, reachable by land only by passing through East Greenwich; through Potowomut, Warwick also shares a border with North Kingstown. Because of the North Kingstown border, Warwick borders two Rhode Island counties: Providence County and Washington County.
The following villages are located in Warwick:
The following villages are located in Warwick:
Warwick is officially a part of the Providence metropolitan area, which has a population of 1,600,852 in the 2010 census.
The 2020 United States census counted 82,823 people, 36,555 households, and 21,150 families in Warwick. The population density was 2,366.3 inhabitants per square mile (913.6/km2). There were 38,625 housing units at an average density of 1,103.5 per square mile (426.1/km2).[19][20] The racial makeup was 85.69% (70,967) white or European American (84.28% non-Hispanic white), 2.11% (1,751) black or African-American, 0.3% (252) Native American or Alaska Native, 3.11% (2,575) Asian, 0.02% (13)
or Alaska Native, 3.11% (2,575) Asian, 0.02% (13) Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian, 2.58% (2,138) from other races, and 6.19% (5,127) from two or more races.[21] Hispanic or Latino of any race was 6.06% (5,019) of the population.[22]
Of the 36,555 households, 22.5% had children under the age of 18; 42.6% were married couples living together; 30.5% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. 33.8% of households consisted of individuals and 16.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.[19] The average household size was 2.3 and the average family size was 2.9.[23] The percent of those with a bachelor’s degree or higher was estimated to be 25.3% of the population.[24]
16.9% of the population was under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 29.4% from 45 to 64, and 21.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46.0 years. For every 100 females, the population had 108.6 males.[19] For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 112.4 males.[19]
The 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $73,285 (with a margin of error of +/- $2,534) and the median family income was $90,027 (+/- $4,102). Males had a median income of $51,057 (+/- $1,899) versus $39,959 (+/- $1,627) for females.[25] The median income for those above 16 years old was $44,491 (+/- $1,873).[26] Approximately, 3.8% of families and 7.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under the age
line, including 7.0% of those under the age of 18 and 9.2% of those ages 65 or over.[27][28]
Warwick is split into three districts in the Rhode Island Senate which are currently held by Democrats Michael McCaffrey (District 29), Jeanine Calkin (District 30), and Kendra Anderson (District 31). The town is a part of Rhode Island's 2nd congressional district, which is currently represented by Democrat Seth Magaziner. It is traditionally Democratic in presidential elections; no Republican has carried it in over three decades.
It is considered part of the Pawtuxet River Valley  [Wikidata]. Before its dissolution, Eckerd Corporation had its headquarters in Warwick.[30]
The ten largest employers in Warwick are Kent Memorial Hospital, Citizens Bank- Warwick Call Center, UPS, MetLife, City of Warwick, Leviton Manufacturing, Wal-Mart, Community College of Rhode Island, J.C. Penney, Kenney Manufacturing, and Inskip Automall.
Local public schools are operated by Warwick Public Schools.[34] Toll Gate High School and Pilgrim High School are the two comprehensive public high schools located in Warwick. The high schools are set for renovations in March 2025, a year after the city council issued a $350 million bond to rebuild them.[35] The two public middle schools are Winman Junior High School and Warwick Veterans Junior High School. Aldrich Junior High School and Gorton Junior High School closed in 2016 as part of the
Junior High School closed in 2016 as part of the school consolidation project.[36] The school department is headed by superintendent Lynn Dambruch.[37]
Bishop Hendricken High School is an all-male college preparatory Catholic high school located in Warwick.[38] Rocky Hill School is a Pre-K–12 co-ed secular country day school located on Warwick's isolated Potowomut peninsula. The school lists an East Greenwich address, despite being geographically included as part of the city of Warwick.[39]
The Community College of Rhode Island Knight Campus is also located in Warwick on the former Knight Estate.[40]
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 14 CIVIL PREPAREDNESS
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:18 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 1 of 1 Chapter 14 CIVIL PREPAREDNESS1 Sec. 14-1. Trained shelter managers deemed part of city emergency management organization. Shelter managers who possess a certificate of proper training from the city defense civil preparedness agency shall be considered as a special staff forming part of the operational emergency management organization of the city.  (Code 1971, § 6-1) Sec. 14-2.
of the city.  (Code 1971, § 6-1) Sec. 14-2. Assignment of shelter managers to shelter areas; control of areas; powers; chain of command. Shelter managers shall be assigned to specific shelter areas by the city defense civil preparedness agency and shall be in complete charge of such specified shelter areas subject to orders of the civil preparedness director and/or deputy director of civil preparedness when communication is possible. In the absence of such communication, the shelter manager of
of such communication, the shelter manager of an assigned shelter area shall possess all the powers and duties of the civil preparedness director of the city. Shelter managers who find themselves in a shelter not specifically assigned to them shall act as deputy shelter managers to the assigned shelter manager. In the absence of the assigned shelter manager, any shelter manager present shall assume the duties of the assigned shelter manager.  (Code 1971, § 6-2) Sec. 14-3. Time when duties of
(Code 1971, § 6-2) Sec. 14-3. Time when duties of shelter managers are in effect. The duties of the special staff of shelter managers shall begin upon the declaration of an emergency by the President of the United States, the governor of the state or the mayor of the city and/or any persons previously given the power to declare an emergency by ordinance or ordinances, and shall continue so long as the declaration of the emergency is in force.  (Code 1971, § 6-3)
1Cross reference(s)—Administration, ch. 2; board of public safety, § 6-71 et seq.; rescue services, § 20-291 et seq.; police, ch. 52.  State law reference(s)—Public fallout shelters, G.L. 1956, § 30-15.3-1 et seq.
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 1 of 31 Chapter 6 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS1 ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL Sec. 6-1. False testimony before city council or city board or commission. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to give false testimony under oath or affirmation during any hearing before the city council or any boards or commissions of the city.  (b) Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be
of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-4.  (Code 1971, § 13-28) Sec. 6-2. Prohibition against serving on more than two boards or commissions simultaneously. No person shall serve on more than two city boards, commissions, agencies, advisory committees, authorities and all other appointments by the mayor, the city council, or the city council president simultaneously. In the event that a person is appointed to a city board or commission for a
is appointed to a city board or commission for a term which coincides with any portion of a term of two other city boards or commissions of which he or she is a member, then that appointment shall be null and void.  The foregoing shall not apply to any member of a city board or commission who shall serve in an ex officio capacity.  (Ord. No. O-09-5, § I, 2-19-09) Sec. 6-3. Scheduling of meetings. Meetings of the planning board or the zoning board of review shall not be scheduled to or otherwise
of review shall not be scheduled to or otherwise coincide with a regularly scheduled meeting of the Warwick City Council or any committees thereof.  (Ord. No. O-21-25, § I, 12-10-21) Secs. 6-4—6-30. Reserved. ARTICLE II. DIVERSITY COMMISSION2  1Cross reference(s)—Harbor management commission, § 24-5; Warwick Station Redevelopment Agency (WSRA), § 51-22 et. seq.  2Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. O-07-16, § I, adopted July 10, 2007, repealed § 6-31, which pertained to established affirmative action
which pertained to established affirmative action commission; membership; duties; organization and derived from Ord. No. O-94-20, § I, 9-
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 2 of 31  12-94; Ord. No. O-96-22, § I, 6-10-96. Subsequently, Ord. No. O-07-15, § I, adopted July 10, 2007, added § 6-31 to read as herein set out.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 3 of 31 Sec. 6-31. Established; membership; duties; organization. Under the authority granted to the city council under section 8-20, entitled "additional boards," of the City Charter, a diversity commission shall be established. The commission shall consist of seven members; four of which shall be appointed by the mayor and three of which shall be appointed by the city council president, upon recommendation of council members. The
upon recommendation of council members. The members shall be appointed for a term of four years and shall serve without compensation. The commission at its first meeting shall select a chairperson and such other officers as it deems necessary from among its members and adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of the City Charter and the personnel merit system. It shall be the duty of the commission, in cooperation with the director of
commission, in cooperation with the director of personnel and appointing officers, to assist all municipal departments and divisions to ensure that they are fully integrating all residents into the work they do for the community and that they are accessible to all residents.  (Ord. No. O-07-15, § I, 7-10-07) Secs. 6-32—6-50. Reserved. ARTICLE III. BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW3 Sec. 6-51. Rules of procedure for appeals from assessments. The procedure to be followed in the filing of appeals by
to be followed in the filing of appeals by property owners from assessments as determined by the tax assessor is as follows:  (1) All appeals to the board of assessment review shall be on petitions provided by such board and must be filed with such board no later than December 15, 1977, and October 15 of each year thereafter.  (2) All questions on such petition shall be answered completely.  (3) A separate petition shall be filed for each review requested.  (4) The owner of record must file all
requested.  (4) The owner of record must file all petitions or, if this is not possible, his/her mark or the signature of his/her legal representative must appear, and his/her title must be affixed thereto.  (5) Petitioners will be notified of the time and place of the hearing.  (6) The owner of record, or his/her representative, must appear at such hearing. If persons other than the owner of record are to testify, then a written authorization filed by the landowner of record must be presented
by the landowner of record must be presented and recorded.  (7) Failure on the part of any petitioner or his/her legal representative to appear at the time and place designated by such board for his/her petition to be heard, without prior notification, will be recorded as a default by nonappearance.  a. Any petition so recorded will not be reheard for a period of one fiscal year. No petition may be resubmitted for any year for which a prior petition was recorded as a default due to the
petition was recorded as a default due to the nonappearance of the petitioner or his/her legal representative.  b. There shall be no rehearing of any petition for the period of one fiscal year, unless the petitioner can present new or different evidence, which evidence could not have been presented to such  3Cross reference(s)—Taxation, ch. 74.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 4 of 31 board at the time of the original hearing, or unless in the opinion of such board unusual circumstances warrant a rehearing.  (8) The procedure for rehearing shall be as follows:  a. A new petition must be filed with an accompanying list or brief explanation.  b. The board of assessment review, at its regular meeting after the filing of the petition for rehearing, will decide on the merits for a rehearing, and the petitioner
on the merits for a rehearing, and the petitioner will be notified in writing of the findings and recommendations of such board.  (9) Attorneys, expert witnesses, and any other persons may be presented by the petitioners to such board in the hearing of any petitions.  (10) All testimony given before such board shall be under oath and shall be recorded.  (11) The proceedings of the board of assessment review shall be recorded and kept in a minutes book provided by such board. This minutes book
book provided by such board. This minutes book shall never leave the office of the board of assessment review.  (12) All decisions of the board of assessment review shall be by resolution.  (13) The public hearing of the board of assessment review shall be open to the public and to the press.  (14) All petitioners will be notified in writing of the finding, recommendations, and decision of such board.  (15) All petitions shall be numbered and heard with reference to the tax assessor's plat and
with reference to the tax assessor's plat and lot numbers.  (16) All petitions will be acknowledged by the board of assessment review by a postcard.  (17) All proceedings of the board of assessment review shall be by an agenda.  (Code 1971, § 21-1) Secs. 6-52—6-70. Reserved. ARTICLE IV. BOARD OF PUBLIC SAFETY4 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 6-71. Establishment of regulations pertaining to removal of illegally parked vehicles. The board of public safety may make further rules and regulations not
safety may make further rules and regulations not inconsistent with chapter 76 to implement the provisions of section 76-7 et seq.  (Code 1971, § 22-12) Sec. 6-72. Permits: concealed carry weapons. (a) Preamble: G.L. § 11-47-11 establishes the standards for local municipalities to issue concealed carry weapons (CCW) permits; and as qualified applicants are law-abiding citizens trained and certified in the use of firearms  4Cross reference(s)—Civil preparedness, ch. 14; fire prevention and
preparedness, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 5 of 31 they must be treated with dignity and respect as they engage in the legal right to seek said permit; while the board of public safety has the power to regulate the issuance of CCW permits for the City of Warwick, it is critical to ensure procedures and standards are not imposed in an overly broad, or arbitrary manner. Warwick residents and business owners who meet the criteria set forth by the State of RI must be ensured a
set forth by the State of RI must be ensured a timely, fair, predictable and consistent process to apply for a CCW permit through our municipal licensing authority; in an effort to promote transparency in government, avoid any misunderstandings, and protect applicants' right to due process, applicants who are denied a CCW permit must be notified of the reason(s) for disapproval in a timely, written manner; and the Warwick City Council is adamant that CCW permits processed by the board of public
that CCW permits processed by the board of public safety be issued in strict compliance with G.L. § 11-47-11.  (b) The Warwick Board of Public Safety shall adhere to the following procedures in considering the application and issuance of CCW permits: 1. The Warwick Board of Public Safety (a.k.a. "the board"), as the licensing authority for the City of Warwick is charged with issuing concealed carry weapons (CCW) permits. Individuals must be 21 years of age or older to apply for a CCW permit and
of age or older to apply for a CCW permit and meet the following criteria:  a. Have a bona fide residence or place of business within the City of Warwick verified by either the Warwick Board of Canvassers, Warwick Department of Taxation or the Warwick Chief of Police, or  b. Have a bona fide residence within the United States and a license or permit to carry a pistol or revolver concealed upon his or her person issued by the authorities of any other state or subdivision of the United States.
other state or subdivision of the United States.  c. The board will consider business, employment and personal factors when reviewing "good reasons" and "proper reasons" to determine if a CCW permit is to be issued.  2. Per G.L. § 11-47-11, the board shall issue a permit to an applicant to carry a pistol or revolver concealed upon his/her person everywhere within this state for four years from date of issue. This permit shall not contain any restrictions, however state and federal law shall
restrictions, however state and federal law shall still apply. The permit shall be issued to the applicant if:  a. It appears that the applicant has good reason to fear an injury to his or her person or property;  b. The applicant has any other proper reason for carrying a pistol or revolver;  c. He or she is a suitable person to be so licensed;  d. The applicant must demonstrate competence, familiarity and proficiency with a handgun by completing a certified NRA firearms safety course or its
a certified NRA firearms safety course or its equivalent of at least four hours, which includes classroom and range time.  (1) The firearms safety course must be completed within three years prior to the initial permit. CCW permit renewals will only require recertification on the range, as indicated by the CCW permit application.  (2) A list of certified firearms safety courses is included in the CCW permit application.  3. An applicant is not required to present a "purpose" or "need" beyond
required to present a "purpose" or "need" beyond what is called for in G.L. § 11-47-11. For the purpose of applications to the board under G.L. § 11-47-11 "Self-defense" based upon previous threats/threatening conduct within the prior six months documented by a police report or written complaint is a "good" or "proper reason. No line of questioning by the board during the interview process will call for speculation as to how the applicant may alter his or her actions to negate the request/ need
his or her actions to negate the request/ need for a CCW permit. The following may be considered when the board determines a "good" or "proper reason.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 6 of 31 a. Conditions of employment or business necessity, whether required or preferred, are considered "proper reason" for issuing a CCW permit. The nature of an applicant's work may warrant a "good reason" for a CCW permit to be approved. Examples include but are not limited to: amount of money carried, lateness of the hour, past instances of crime, the surrounding neighborhood and other dangerous circumstances.  Requesting a
and other dangerous circumstances.  Requesting a reciprocal CCW permit by the City of Warwick when a CCW permit. has been issued by the Rhode Island Attorney General is a "proper reason." Possession of a current federal firearms license is a factor in consideration of the application for the CCW permit.  c. Suitability of the applicant may also be a consideration when issuing a permit. Decisions must be based on evidence provided by the application process and not merely conjecture. The board
process and not merely conjecture. The board must articulate a specific and justifiable reason to find someone unsuitable.  4. The board will review the completed application along with three letters of reference and a background criminal investigation (BCI) within 60 calendar days of receipt. Letters of reference shall only be required for new, not renewal, permit applications. Applicants are required to appear before the board for a personal interview. A hearing with written or recorded
interview. A hearing with written or recorded minutes must be held for the applicant. The specific reason(s) for denying a CCW permit must be provided in writing by registered mail within ten business days of conducting the interview or the permit shall be automatically issued.  a. Applicants may request reconsideration in the case of a CCW permit denial by the board. Furthermore, said applicants have the right to judicial review under G.L. § 42-35-15, RI Administrative Procedures.  5.
§ 42-35-15, RI Administrative Procedures.  5. Legitimate reasons for an applicant to be deemed unsuitable to be licensed include:  a. Be ineligible to possess a firearm by virtue of having been convicted of a felony.  b. Have been found guilty of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a misdemeanor under Rhode Island General Laws or similar laws of any other state relating to a controlled dangerous substance within a five-year period immediately preceding the date on which the
immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted.  c. Found guilty of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to operating a vehicle while intoxicated within the five-year period immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted, or at any time after the application has been submitted.  d. Entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to or been found guilty of a crime of violence, as defined by G.L. §§ 11-47-2(2), 11-47-5(a), including domestic
§§ 11-47-2(2), 11-47-5(a), including domestic abuse, at the misdemeanor level, unless five years have elapsed since completion of sentence or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled, or unless the conviction was set aside and the prosecution dismissed, prior to the date on which the application is submitted.  (1) Prohibition also applies to any person sentenced to community confinement or electronic surveillance in accordance with G.L. § 11-47-5(c).  e. Been convicted of, have
G.L. § 11-47-5(c).  e. Been convicted of, have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, or be charged under indictment or a bill of information for any crime of violence or any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term of one year or greater.  f. Is a fugitive from justice.  g. Released from active or reserve duty from the Armed Forces of the United States with a discharge characterized as "bad conduct discharge", or a "dishonorable discharge". In the case of Commissioned Officers and
In the case of Commissioned Officers and Warrant Officers of the United States Armed Forces, the punishment of "dismissal" rendered subject to a verdict of "guilty" at a trial by military court-martial is
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 7 of 31 deemed to be disqualifying under this paragraph. For the purposes of this paragraph, the United States Coast Guard is considered an Armed Force.  i. Be ineligible to possess or receive a firearm under 18 U.S.C. 922(g).  j. Had a permit revoked by the board within four years prior to the most recent application.  k. Been denied a pistol permit in a jurisdiction other than the City of Warwick based on suitability grounds within
of Warwick based on suitability grounds within four years prior to the most recent application.  l. Adjudged mentally incompetent at the time of application or for five years prior to application as defined in G.L. § 40.1-5.3-3 or a comparable procedure located in another state following a hearing at which the applicant/defendant was represented by counsel or a representative.  6. Notwithstanding any other chapter or section of the general laws of the state of Rhode Island, the board shall not
of the state of Rhode Island, the board shall not provide or release to any individual, firm, association or corporation the name, address, or date of birth of any person who has held or currently holds a license or permit to carry a concealed pistol or revolver. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the release of any statistical data of a general nature relative to age, gender and racial or ethnic background nor shall it be construed to prevent the release of information to parties
to prevent the release of information to parties involved in any prosecution of § 11-47-8 or in response to a lawful subpoena in any criminal or civil action which the person is a party to that action.  a. While completing their duties and responsibilities in exercising their authority to issue or deny CCW permits in compliance with federal, state and local law, the board of public safety is acting under sovereign immunity.  7. Warwick Ordinance § 40-1(19) disorderly conduct is the prevailing
§ 40-1(19) disorderly conduct is the prevailing law for those individuals issued a CCW permit unless circumstances necessitates the gun owner to no longer keep his or her weapon concealed. Brandishing, improper exhibition or unlawful display is not permissible. Unintended viewing of the weapon as a nondeliberate act is not actionable.  (Ord. No. O-15-4, § I, 5-15-15) Secs. 6-73—6-90. Reserved. DIVISION 2. FIRE DUTIES5 Sec. 6-91. Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. Nothing in this
ordinances not affected by Code. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any section of article II of chapter 5 of the 1959 compiled ordinances, relative to the bureau of fire, and all such sections are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  (Code 1971, § 7-19)  5Cross reference(s)—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8.  State law reference(s)—Establishment of bureau of fire, P.L. 1953,
of bureau of fire, P.L. 1953, ch. 3136; P.L. 1955, ch. 3554.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 8 of 31 Sec. 6-92. General powers and duties of board of public safety in lieu of board of fire. The board of public safety shall fulfill all the duties and responsibilities of, and have all the rights and powers of, the bureau of fire, under the ordinances of the city and Public Law No. 3136, passed by the general assembly at its January 1953 session, pursuant to section 8-6 of the city Charter.  (Code 1971, § 7-20) Sec. 6-93.
the city Charter.  (Code 1971, § 7-20) Sec. 6-93. Responsibility for administration of fire department. All matters relating to the administration of the fire department shall be considered by the board of public safety as a whole, which bureau shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration and management of the fire department.  (Code 1971, § 7-21) Sec. 6-94. Authority over fire department. The board of public safety shall have the authority to appoint, remove, organize,
have the authority to appoint, remove, organize, and control the chief of the fire department, the officers and men/women of the fire department and all other attaches of the fire department of the city as such is now or hereafter may be constituted, and shall also have authority to make all needful rules, regulations, etc., for the efficiency, management and direction thereof not inconsistent with the laws of the state.  (Code 1971, § 7-22) Sec. 6-95. Temporary appointments to fill vacancies
6-95. Temporary appointments to fill vacancies in fire department. In case of a vacancy in any office of the fire department, the board of public safety shall designate an officer of the permanent department to act in such office until a permanent replacement has been appointed. Such acting officer shall not be permanent.  (Code 1971, § 7-23) Sec. 6-96. Estimate of annual expenses for fire protection. The board of public safety shall be responsible for the preparation of the estimate of the
for the preparation of the estimate of the annual expenses of the fire department for fire protection. Such estimate shall be submitted to the mayor for his/her annual budget, and to the council.  (Code 1971, § 7-24) Sec. 6-97. Control of fire apparatus. All fire apparatus now owned by the city shall be under the control and direction of the board of public safety.  (Code 1971, § 7-25) Secs. 6-98—6-120. Reserved. PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE V.
Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE V. COMMISSION ON HISTORICAL CEMETERIES
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 9 of 31 ARTICLE V. COMMISSION ON HISTORICAL CEMETERIES6 Sec. 6-121. Established. A commission on historical cemeteries is hereby created. The name of such commission shall be "Warwick Commission on Historical Cemeteries." Such commission shall be nonpolitical.  (Code 1971, § 5-40) Sec. 6-122. Membership. The membership of the historical cemetery commission shall be composed as follows:  (1)
commission shall be composed as follows:  (1) Membership is restricted to bona fide residents of the city.  (2) Membership is restricted to a maximum of seven members. The commission shall also include two alternates, to be designated as the first and second alternate members. These alternate members shall sit and may actively participate in hearings. The first alternate shall vote if a member of the board is unable to serve at a hearing. In the absence of the first alternate member, the second
absence of the first alternate member, the second alternate member shall serve in the position of the first alternate. No member or alternate may vote on any matter before the board unless they have attended all hearings concerning such matter.  (3) The members shall be appointed by the mayor from a group of prominent and actively interested citizens.  (Code 1971, § 5-41; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I, 4-8-96; Ord. No. O-03-13, § I, 7-21-03) Sec. 6-123. Term of office. (a) Upon passage of this article,
Term of office. (a) Upon passage of this article, the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, seven members.  (b) The mayor shall annually, in the month of January, appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, a number of members equal to the number of members whose terms expire to hold office for three years from the first Monday of January in the year of his or her appointment, and until his or her successor is chosen.  (Code 1971, § 5-42; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I,
(Code 1971, § 5-42; Ord. No. O-96-15, § I, 4-8-96) Sec. 6-124. Replacement of members for failure to attend meetings. In the event that any member of the historical cemetery commission shall be absent from three consecutive meetings, he/she may be replaced as a member of the commission. Such replacement shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and such membership shall terminate upon the appointment and confirmation of the member chosen as a replacement.   6Cross
of the member chosen as a replacement.   6Cross reference(s)—Cemeteries, ch. 12.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 10 of 31 (Code 1971, § 5-43) Sec. 6-125. Purpose. The purpose of the historical cemetery commission shall be as follows: The commission shall cause to be created an inventory of historical cemeteries within the city; formulate and develop plans and programs to restore, rehabilitate and maintain historical cemeteries; recommend to the mayor and city council such action as may be necessary to implement such plans and programs; and
to implement such plans and programs; and investigate sources of funds, including fundraising, grants and development of both corporate and individual sponsors, and all other legitimate and related activities.  (Code 1971, § 5-44) Sec. 6-126. Acceptance of support and money. The historical cemetery commission shall have the authority to accept public support and funds from individuals or others for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this article, and shall make reports of accounting
article, and shall make reports of accounting quarterly to the director of finance of the city.  (Code 1971, § 5-45) Sec. 6-127. Appropriations by city council. The city council has the authority, in its discretion, to appropriate funds necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, and to transfer such funds to the historical cemetery commission for expenditures.  (Code 1971, § 5-46) Secs. 6-128—6-150. Reserved. ARTICLE VI. HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW7 Sec. 6-151. Established; powers. There
OF REVIEW7 Sec. 6-151. Established; powers. There shall be a housing board of review, which is authorized to hear and decide appeals from compliance orders. The board shall have the power to reverse or affirm wholly or partly or to modify any order of the director; and in specific cases to authorize a variance in the application of the terms of chapter 26, where, owing to unusual conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of chapter 26 will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of chapter 26 shall be observed and substantial justice done.  (Code 1971, § 10-84)  7Cross reference(s)—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; fee for appeals before housing board of review, § 18-9.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 11 of 31 Sec. 6-152. Conditions for appeal. Any person upon whom a compliance order has been served may appeal from the compliance order to the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-85) Sec. 6-153. Application for appeal. Application for such an appeal may be made whenever it is alleged that the compliance order does not conform with the true intent of chapter 26 or of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, that the compliance order
pursuant thereto, that the compliance order is contrary to law, that the provisions of chapter 26 do not fully apply, or that in unusual conditions unnecessary hardship will result from the literal enforcement of the provisions of chapter 26. Any eligible person desiring to take an appeal shall file in the office of the board, within ten days after service of the compliance order, a written appeal including a brief statement of the reasons therefor, and a detailed statement of the facts
therefor, and a detailed statement of the facts supporting the appeal. A notice of the appeal shall be forwarded immediately to the director by the secretary of the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-86) Sec. 6-154. Appeal fee. An appeal fee, in accordance with chapter 18, shall be paid upon filing of any application for appeal before the board. Upon receipt of the appeal fee by the board, said fee shall be paid into the city treasury.  (Code 1971, § 10-87) Sec. 6-155. Effect of appeal. An appeal to the
Sec. 6-155. Effect of appeal. An appeal to the board shall stay all proceedings under the compliance order from which such appeal has been taken, except that the director may certify to the board, after receipt of the notice of the appeal, as provided in section 6-153, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, any stay of proceedings would in his/her opinion cause a direct hazard or immediate peril to the health or safety of the occupants of a dwelling or of the public, and in
occupants of a dwelling or of the public, and in such event proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order granted by the chairperson or the acting chairperson of the board on application therefor by the appellant upon notice to the director, and on due cause shown, or by a court of competent jurisdiction. Whenever a restraining order has been issued, the appeal shall be given priority over all other matters before the board, and shall be promptly heard and decided.  (Code 1971,
shall be promptly heard and decided.  (Code 1971, § 10-88) Sec. 6-156. Membership; appointment of members. The housing board of review shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. One member shall be of the minority party.  (Code 1971, § 10-89)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 12 of 31 Sec. 6-157. Term of office. One member of the board shall be appointed for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one to serve for one year, and each new member to serve for five years and until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint a member of the board to fill any unexpired term if a vacancy occurs.  (Code 1971, §
term if a vacancy occurs.  (Code 1971, § 10-90) Sec. 6-158. Qualifications of members. Each member of the board shall be a resident and qualified elector of the city, and one member shall be a qualified builder, or a licensed architect, or a licensed professional engineer. No member of the board shall serve on any other appointive board of the city.  (Code 1971, § 10-91) Sec. 6-159. Officers. The board shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson, and the board shall select one of
as chairperson, and the board shall select one of its members to serve as vice-chairperson.  (Code 1971, § 10-92) Sec. 6-160. Exemption of members from voting. No member of the board shall pass on any matter in which he/she has a business or personal interest.  (Code 1971, § 10-93) Sec. 6-161. Notice of meeting. The board shall meet at least once a month and at other times upon the call of the chairperson. Notice of the meeting to hear an appeal shall be given the appellant, the director, and
shall be given the appellant, the director, and the members of the board, at least ten days before the holding of the meeting, except for a hearing on an appeal involving a restraining order, at which time notice need not exceed 48 hours. Upon receipt of notice of an appeal the director shall forward immediately to the chairperson of the board all pertinent records.  (Code 1971, § 10-95) Sec. 6-162. Quorum for hearing appeal. In order for the board to hear an appeal, a quorum of three members
to hear an appeal, a quorum of three members of the board must be present. When a quorum is not present, the hearing of the appeal shall be postponed until such time as a quorum is present. The board shall provide for a new date for the hearing of the appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 6-161.  (Code 1971, § 10-96)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 13 of 31 Sec. 6-163. Proceedings. All hearings of the housing board of review shall be de novo. All hearings shall be public, and the appellant, his/her representative, the director and any other person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal, and who files a written entry of appearance, shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Written entry of appearance at such hearing shall fulfill the requirements for service of
shall fulfill the requirements for service of any notice or order by the director. The chairperson, or, in his/her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Proceedings of the board shall be conclusive with respect to questions of fact and may be reviewed only on questions of law by courts of competent jurisdiction as provided in section 6-166.  (Code 1971, § 10-97) Sec. 6-164. Majority vote required. A concurring vote of a majority of the
required. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board present at the hearing shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order or decision of the director, and to authorize a variance in the application of any of the provisions of chapter 26 as provided in section 6-151. In the event of a tie vote of the members of the board present at the hearing, the order or decision of the director shall be deemed to have been sustained.  (Code 1971, § 10-98) Sec. 6-165. Records; notice of
1971, § 10-98) Sec. 6-165. Records; notice of decisions. All decisions of the board shall be in writing. The board shall keep clear and detailed minutes of all its proceedings, including its decisions and the reasons therefor and the vote of each member participating therein and the absence of a member or his/her failure to vote. Such record, immediately following the board's decision, shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. Notice of the board's decision shall
record. Notice of the board's decision shall be promptly furnished to the appellant, to his/her representative, to any person who has filed a written entry of appearance, and to the director, and the director shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.  (Code 1971, § 10-99) Sec. 6-166. Court review of decisions. Any person, including the director, aggrieved by a decision of the housing board of review may present to the supreme court a petition duly verified
to the supreme court a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the housing board of review to review such decision of the board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return
prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made, which shall be not less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may on application, upon notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of
to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. If upon the hearing it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a master to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with
may direct and report the same to the court with his/her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the decision brought up for review.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 14 of 31 (Code 1971, § 10-100) Secs. 6-167—6-190. Reserved. ARTICLE VII. JUVENILE HEARING BOARD Sec. 6-191. Established. There is hereby established within the city a juvenile hearing board with the powers set forth in this article for the purpose of hearing all cases referred to such board by the chief of the police department, with respect to persons resident in the city, under the age of 18 years, who are charged with violating the
of 18 years, who are charged with violating the criminal laws of the state or the city.  (Code 1971, § 2-121) Sec. 6-192. Referral of offenders to board. (a) Any person who is a resident of the city and under the age of 18 years who allegedly shall have committed a juvenile offense which if committed by an adult would be a misdemeanor may request a hearing before the juvenile hearing board rather than being referred to the family court; provided, however, that said referral to the juvenile
however, that said referral to the juvenile hearing board is made with the approval of the chief of police of the city; and further provided that referral to said juvenile hearing board shall not be offered to any juvenile:  (1) Who has been charged with the crime of assault or battery, unless specifically approved by the chief of police of the city;  (2) Who shall have been twice previously referred to said board or who shall have been once previously referred to said board and refused or
previously referred to said board and refused or failed to abide by the sanctions imposed or to make the restitution recommended by said board; or  (3) Who at the time of commission of such juvenile offense was within the custody and control of family court, not to include guardianship matters.  (b) The chief of police may offer referral to the juvenile hearing board to any other juvenile offender where, in the opinion of the chief of police, such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile
such referral would be beneficial to the juvenile concerned and the community at large. No referral to said board shall be made by the chief of police until such person, together with his/her legal guardians, shall have, in writing, waived such person's right to a hearing in the family court with respect to the offense charged, shall have admitted guilt to the offense charged, and shall have agreed to abide by the decision of said board; provided, however, that failure to comply with the
however, that failure to comply with the decision of said board may result in the referral of said juvenile to the family court by the chief of police.  (Code 1971, § 2-122) Sec. 6-193. Refusal of referral. The board, after investigation, may refuse to hear any case in which it appears that a juvenile was wrongfully referred in violation of section 6-192. In addition, the board may refuse to hear any case in which the juvenile refuses to supply the board with requested information, fails to
the board with requested information, fails to appear when requested or refuses to cooperate with the proceedings of the board. The board shall immediately notify the chief of police, in writing, of any case
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 15 of 31 which it refuses to hear, and the chief of police shall take whatever further action that is deemed necessary, including referral to the family court.  (Code 1971, § 2-123) Sec. 6-194. Legal representation of offenders. Any juvenile offender shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and present evidence at said hearing. Said legal representation shall be at the offender's own expense.  (Code 1971, § 2-124) Sec. 6-195.
own expense.  (Code 1971, § 2-124) Sec. 6-195. Powers and duties; imposition of sanctions. (a) The board shall hear all cases referred to it by the chief of police and shall recommend sanctions (other than incarceration) and shall direct restitution for any injuries resulting from the commission of such offense.  (b) Sanctions imposed by the board shall be for a period of time not to exceed six months and may consist of, but shall not be limited to, public service, referral to counseling,
to, public service, referral to counseling, curfews, restrictions on association with other offenders, restrictions on employment, and fines not to exceed $100.00, or any combination of the above.  (c) In those cases in which the board shall order restitution, it shall attempt to assist the offender and his/her parents in providing a means whereby the offender may make such restitution. In ordering restitution, the board shall take into account the offender's ability to pay and the amount of
the offender's ability to pay and the amount of actual damages caused as a result of the commission of such offense.  (d) In any proceeding, the board, prior to imposing sanctions, shall request the juvenile offender and his/her parents to agree to the sanctions imposed and to agree to the amount of restitution and manner of making the same. In imposing sanctions or ordering restitution, the board shall consider the nature of the offense, the prior record of the offender, and any mitigating
prior record of the offender, and any mitigating circumstances involved.  (e) The board shall have the right to levy hearing costs.  (Code 1971, § 2-125) Sec. 6-196. Meetings and rules of procedure. (a) The board shall meet not less than once each month; however, the board shall not be required to meet if there are no pending cases before it and no cases currently referred to it by the chief of police. It shall give written notice of the matters to be heard before it to the chief of police, the
to be heard before it to the chief of police, the juvenile officer, and the juvenile offender and his/her parents, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall set forth the nature of the offense, the time and place of the hearing, and the offender's right to be represented by counsel at the offender's expense.  (b) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be closed to the public. The board shall elect one of its
to the public. The board shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and one as its vice-chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the members present shall be required to take any action. The board shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules theretofore adopted, with the approval of the chief of police, and not inconsistent with this article.  (Code
and not inconsistent with this article.  (Code 1971, § 2-126; Ord. No. O-16-20, § I, 8-17-16)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 16 of 31 Sec. 6-197. Membership; term of office. (a) The membership of the board shall consist of seven persons over the age of 18 years, to be appointed by the city council, all of whom shall have been residents for at least three years within the city, and none of whom shall be attorneys admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state, and none shall be an elected official in any capacity in any city or town. The city
in any capacity in any city or town. The city council shall appoint one member whose term shall expire on December 1, 1992, and thereafter until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, three members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1993, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified, and three members whose term shall expire on December 1, 1994, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. During the month of November and annually
During the month of November and annually thereafter, the city council shall appoint a member or members to succeed the member or members whose terms will then next expire, to serve for a term of three years, commencing on December 1, and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a member by death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled in like manner as the original appointment, but only for the remainder
original appointment, but only for the remainder of the term of the former member. No member of the board shall be entitled to receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the board. An attorney may be appointed to the board as an ex officio member by the chief judge of the family court.  (b) The composition of the board shall consist of citizens of the city who have a background in and of the related fields of education, probation and parole, human services, or community youth
and parole, human services, or community youth programs, members of the clergy, former law enforcement or judicial officials or any citizens whom the council deems have the credentials that would be an asset to the board.  (Code 1971, § 2-127) Sec. 6-198. Effective date. This article shall apply to all juveniles alleged to have committed an offense after July 12, 1992.  (Code 1971, § 2-128) Secs. 6-199—6-220. Reserved. ARTICLE VIII. PERSONNEL HEARING BOARD8 Sec. 6-221. Established; membership;
BOARD8 Sec. 6-221. Established; membership; term of office. There is hereby established a personnel hearing board to consist of three qualified electors of the city who shall be known to be in sympathy with the application of modern personnel practices, under a merit system of personnel administration in the public service, and not more than two of whom shall be members of the same political party. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. Each member shall be appointed for a
the mayor. Each member shall be appointed for a term of six years commencing on the expiration of the terms of the present members as follows: one in December 1994, one in December 1996, and one in January 1998. A vacancy, whatever the circumstances of its creation, shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, within 60 days and only for the unexpired portion of the term.   8Cross reference(s)—Personnel merit system, ch. 48.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 17 of 31 (Code 1971, § 14-22) Sec. 6-222. Organization; meetings; quorum; compensation of members. The personnel hearing board shall elect one of its members chairperson. Each member shall take the oath of office before entering upon the duties of office. Members of the board shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses and each member of the board shall be paid a sum to be determined by the council. The board shall
to be determined by the council. The board shall meet at such times and places as shall be specified by call of the chairperson or the mayor. Notice of each meeting shall be given in writing to each member. Two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  (Code 1971, § 14-23) Sec. 6-223. Removal of members. A member of the personnel hearing board shall be subject to removal by the mayor as provided in section 3-3 of the Charter.  (Code 1971, § 14-24) Sec. 6-224. Appeals
(Code 1971, § 14-24) Sec. 6-224. Appeals to board. The personnel hearing board shall hear appeals:  (1) By any person holding full status in the classified service aggrieved by action of the chief of the division of personnel on matters of personnel administration.  (2) By any person holding full status in the classified service who has been discharged, demoted, suspended or laid off by any appointing authority.  (3) By any person who holds the belief that he/she has been discriminated against
belief that he/she has been discriminated against because of his/her race, color, creed, national origin, religious or political opinions, handicap, sex, or affiliations in any personnel action. Such appeals shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of chapter 48 or the personnel rules.  (Code 1971, § 14-25) Sec. 6-225. Members not to run for or hold elective office. No member of the personnel hearing board shall seek the nomination of or be a candidate for any elective office; neither
be a candidate for any elective office; neither shall any elective officer be appointed a member of the personnel hearing board unless he/she resigns his/her elective office.  (Code 1971, § 14-82) Secs. 6-226—6-240. Reserved. PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE IX. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1992)
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 18 of 31 ARTICLE IX. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1992)9 DIVISION 1. GENERALLY Sec. 6-241. Administration and general responsibility for retirement system. The general administration and the responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of article II of chapter 60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.
60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-114) Sec. 6-242. Membership. The membership of the retirement board shall consist of:  (1) The director of finance, ex officio.  (2) The chief of personnel, ex officio.  (3) The chairperson of the city council finance committee, ex officio.  (4) The president of the municipal employees bargaining unit, ex officio.  (5) Three members to be elected within 60 days following the effective date of Ordinance No. O-70-9 for a term expiring
date of Ordinance No. O-70-9 for a term expiring June 30, 1973, providing:  a. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who also hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as designated by the state labor relations board for collective bargaining purposes with a participating employer. Such member shall hold office only while a member of both the retirement system and appropriate bargaining unit.  b. One of the three members shall
unit.  b. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who are also retirants of the system. Such member shall hold office only while a member of the retirement system as a retirement.  c. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the retirement system who does not hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as described above and who is not a retirant. Such member shall hold office only while a member of
member shall hold office only while a member of the retirement system.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms of three years beginning July 1, 1970, and each three years thereafter.   9Cross reference(s)—Retirement system, ch. 60.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 19 of 31 (6) Four members who shall not be officers or employees of the city. When this article becomes effective, the mayor shall appoint two members for a term of one year, one for a term of two years and one for a term of three years. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term of three years from the date of expiration of the term for which his/her predecessor was appointed.  (Code 1971, § 16-115) Sec. 6-243. Filling of
(Code 1971, § 16-115) Sec. 6-243. Filling of vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the office of a retirement board member, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled.  (Code 1971, § 16-116) Sec. 6-244. Voting. Each board member shall be entitled to one vote on the board. An affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present shall be necessary for a decision by the members at any meeting of the board. The presence of six
at any meeting of the board. The presence of six members of the retirement board shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting business at any meeting.  (Code 1971, § 16-118; Ord. No. O-09-24, § I, 9-15-09) Sec. 6-245. Jurisdiction. The retirement board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in all matters relating to or affecting the funds provided for in this article and article II of chapter 60, including, in addition to all other matters, all claims for benefits and refunds
matters, all claims for benefits and refunds under article II of chapter 60, and its action, decisions or determinations in any matter shall be reviewable according to law.  (Code 1971, § 16-119) Sec. 6-246. Establishment of regulations for administration of retirement system; other functions of board. Subject to the limitations of this article and article II of chapter 60, the retirement board shall, from time to time, establish rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by
for the administration of funds created by this law, for the transaction of its business and for the limitation of the time within which claims may be filed and for the administration and transaction of the business of the retirement system, and shall perform such other functions as are required for the execution of this article and article II of chapter 60.  (Code 1971, § 16-120) Sec. 6-247. Officers. The retirement board shall elect a chairperson from its membership by majority vote. The
from its membership by majority vote. The chief of personnel shall be the secretary of the retirement board, but he/she may appoint an employee of the retirement system to perform necessary duties of the position.  (Code 1971, § 16-121)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 20 of 31 Sec. 6-248. Payment of expenses. All necessary expenses of the retirement board and the staff of the retirement system shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the retirement board shall approve.  (Code 1971, § 16-122) Sec. 6-249. Employees of retirement system. The mayor shall appoint all employees of the retirement system of the city and direct their work in accordance with the policy and rules established by the
with the policy and rules established by the retirement board. The compensation of all persons so appointed shall be paid in accordance with the comprehensive compensation plan of the city. Appointment to positions created as a result of this article shall be made in accordance with the merit system ordinance.  (Code 1971, § 16-123) Sec. 6-250. Authority to engage actuarial, investment and other services. The retirement board may engage such actuarial, investment, administrative and other
actuarial, investment, administrative and other services as may be required or deemed advisable to transact the business of the retirement system.  (Code 1971, § 16-124) Sec. 6-251. Collection of data for evaluation. The staff of the employee retirement system under the direction of the chief of personnel shall keep in convenient form such data as shall be necessary for actuarial evaluation of the liabilities of the retirement system and for checking the experience of the system.  (Code 1971, §
the experience of the system.  (Code 1971, § 16-125) Sec. 6-252. Records; annual report. The secretary of the retirement board shall be responsible for keeping a record of all its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection. He/she shall publish annually a report approved by the retirement board showing, for the fiscal year, the amount of the accumulated cash financial conditions of the system by means of an actuarial evaluation of the assets and liabilities of the retirement system.
assets and liabilities of the retirement system.  (Code 1971, § 16-126) Sec. 6-253. Duties of city solicitor. The city solicitor shall be the legal adviser and counsel of the retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-127)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 21 of 31 Sec. 6-254. Medical board. The retirement board shall designate a medical board to be composed of three physicians who shall arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under the provisions of article II of chapter 60, shall investigate all essential statements and certificates made by or on behalf of a member in connection with an application for disability retirement and shall report in writing to the
retirement and shall report in writing to the retirement board its conclusions and recommendations upon all the matters referred to it.  (Code 1971, § 16-128) Sec. 6-255. Recommendation of changes in retirement system due to changes in Social Security Act. Whenever the maximum earnings base for taxes and benefits under the federal Social Security Act is changed in the future, the retirement board shall study the effect on total contributions and total benefits provided by the federal Social
and total benefits provided by the federal Social Security Act and by this retirement system and shall make recommendations as to the desirability of changes in the retirement system to the city council.  (Code 1971, § 16-129) Sec. 6-256. Limitation on administrative powers and duties. Except as provided in this article and article II of chapter 60, the retirement board shall have no administrative powers or duties.  (Code 1971, § 16-130) Secs. 6-257—6-270. Reserved. DIVISION 2. ACTUARIAL
6-257—6-270. Reserved. DIVISION 2. ACTUARIAL SERVICES Sec. 6-271. Actuary to be technical adviser; qualifications. The actuary shall be the technical adviser of the retirement board on matters regarding the operation of the funds created by this article and article II of chapter 60, and shall perform such other duties as are required in connection therewith. He/she shall be a qualified member as a Fellow of the Society of Actuaries.  (Code 1971, § 16-141) Sec. 6-272. Actuarial investigation to
§ 16-141) Sec. 6-272. Actuarial investigation to be performed every three years. The retirement board shall have made at least every three years an actuarial investigation into the mortality, service and compensation experiences of the members, retirants, and beneficiaries of the retirement system and, taking into account the results of such investigation and valuation, the retirement board shall establish for the retirement system such mortality, service and other tables as shall be deemed
service and other tables as shall be deemed necessary.  (Code 1971, § 16-142)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 22 of 31 Sec. 6-273. Annual evaluation of assets and liabilities. On the basis of tables arrived at pursuant to the actuarial investigation as the retirement board shall adopt, it shall make an annual evaluation of the assets and liabilities of the fund of the retirement system. The assets used for such evaluation shall equal the lesser of the asset value before adjustment and the market value of assets, including any accrued
the market value of assets, including any accrued contributions.  (Code 1971, § 16-143) Sec. 6-274. Certification of rates of contribution payable by employer. On the basis of the annual evaluation performed pursuant to this division, the retirement board shall certify the rates of contribution payable by the employers.  (Code 1971, § 16-144) Sec. 6-275. Determination of asset value before adjustment and market value of assets; establishment of adjustment ratio. On each January 31 from 1985
of adjustment ratio. On each January 31 from 1985 through 1988, on June 30, 1988, and on each subsequent June 30, the asset value before adjustment and the market value of assets shall be determined. If the market value of assets exceeds the asset value before adjustment by an amount equal to six percent or more of the actuarial accrued liability of the benefits of all retired employees and beneficiaries, then an adjustment to the monthly benefit is warranted. An increase in monthly benefits
is warranted. An increase in monthly benefits may be granted, such that the increase in actuarial accrued liability does not exceed one-third of the amount by which the market value of assets exceeded the asset value before adjustment and such that the average increase in monthly benefits does not exceed the sum of the negotiated increases in base wages covered under the collective bargaining agreement effective during the 12-month period beginning on the July 1 immediately prior to the
beginning on the July 1 immediately prior to the effective date of increase in monthly benefits. If an increase in the monthly benefits is granted, then the adjustment referred to in "asset value after adjustment" shall equal two times the actuarial accrued liability of the increase in monthly benefits.  (Code 1971, § 16-145) Secs. 6-276—6-290. Reserved. DIVISION 3. INVESTMENT OF TRUST FUNDS Sec. 6-291. Board designated trustee of funds; powers and duties. The retirement board shall be the
and duties. The retirement board shall be the trustees of the funds created by this article and article II of chapter 60 and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such funds, subject to all the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by law upon a corporate trustee in the state in making and disposing of its investments, and subject to like terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions said retirement board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer
power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer or dispose of any of the securities and investments in which any of the funds created in this article and article II of chapter 60 shall have been invested, as well as of the proceeds of said investments and any moneys belonging to said funds.  (Code 1971, § 16-156)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 23 of 31 Sec. 6-292. Fiduciary role of members and employees of retirement system with regard to funds. Except as provided in this article and article II of chapter 60, no member of and no employee of the retirement system shall have any direct interest in the gains or profits of any investment made by the retirement board, nor as such receive any pay or emolument for his/her services. No member of the board or employee of the
No member of the board or employee of the retirement system shall directly or indirectly for himself/herself or as an agent in any manner use the assets of the retirement system except to make such current and necessary payments as are authorized by the retirement board, nor shall any member or employee of the retirement system become an endorser or surety or become in any manner an obligor for moneys loaned by or borrowed from the retirement board.  (Code 1971, § 16-157) Sec. 6-293. Group
board.  (Code 1971, § 16-157) Sec. 6-293. Group annuity contract purchase authorized. The retirement board is hereby authorized and empowered to apply for and purchase from an insurance company, authorized to transact business in the state, a group annuity contract, in form approved by said retirement board, for the purpose of providing benefits to members of the retirement system, as defined by article II of chapter 60. Such group annuity contract may contain a provision for establishing
contract may contain a provision for establishing separate accounts funding for the purpose of allocating thereto amounts paid to the insurer by the retirement board in connection with the retirement system for the future payment of retirement benefits in guaranteed fixed amounts.  (Code 1971, § 16-158) Secs. 6-294—6-310. Reserved. ARTICLE X. RETIREMENT BOARD (FOR SYSTEM EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1992) Sec. 6-311. Established; responsibility for administration of plan; membership; voting; officers. (a)
of plan; membership; voting; officers. (a) Board established; general duties. The general administration and the responsibility for the proper operation of the plan and for making effective the provisions of article III of chapter 60 are hereby vested in a retirement board.  (b) Membership. The membership of the retirement board shall consist of:  (1) The city's finance director ex officio;  (2) The city's personnel chief ex officio;  (3) The chairperson of the city council finance committee ex
of the city council finance committee ex officio;  (4) The president of the union ex officio;  (5) Three members to be elected for a term expiring June 30, 1994, providing:  a. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who also hold membership within an appropriate bargaining unit as designated by the state labor relations board for collective bargaining purposes with the city. Such member shall hold office only while a member of both the plan and the
only while a member of both the plan and the appropriate bargaining unit.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 24 of 31 b. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who are retirees. Such member shall hold office only while a retiree.  c. One of the three members shall be elected from and by the membership of the plan who does not hold membership in the union as described above and who is not a retiree. Such member shall hold office only while a member of the plan.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms
plan.  Subsequent elections shall be for terms of three years beginning July 1, 1994, and each three years thereafter.  (6) Four members who shall not be employees of the city shall be appointed for terms of three years from the date of expiration of the term for which the predecessor of each member was appointed.  (c) Filling of vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the office of a retirement board member, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was
term in the same manner as the office was previously filled.  (d) Voting. Each retirement board member shall be entitled to one vote on the board. An affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present shall be necessary for a decision by the members at any meeting of the board. The presence of six members of the retirement board shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting business at any meeting.  (e) Officers. The retirement board shall elect a chairperson from its
board shall elect a chairperson from its membership by majority vote. The chief of personnel shall be the secretary of the retirement board, but he or she may appoint an employee of the plan to perform necessary duties of the position.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.1), 12-13-93; Ord. No. O-09-25, § I, 9-15-09) Sec. 6-312. Powers and duties. (a) Jurisdiction. The retirement board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in all matters relating to or affecting the funds provided for in this article
affecting the funds provided for in this article and article III of chapter 60, including, in addition to all other matters, all claims for benefits and refunds under this article and article III of chapter 60, and its action, decisions or determinations in any matter shall be reviewable according to law.  (b) Authority to establish regulations for administration of plan. Subject to the limitations of this article and article III of chapter 60, the retirement board shall, from time to time,
the retirement board shall, from time to time, establish rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by this law, for the transaction of its business and for the limitation of the time within which claims may be filed and for the administration and transaction of the business of the plan, and shall perform such other functions as are required for the execution of this article and article III of chapter 60.  (c) Payment of expenses. All necessary expenses of the retirement
All necessary expenses of the retirement board and the staff of the plan shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the retirement board shall approve.  (d) Limitation on administrative powers and duties. Except as provided in this article and article III of chapter 60, the retirement board shall have no administrative powers or duties.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.2), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-313. Records; annual report. The secretary of the retirement board shall be responsible for keeping a
board shall be responsible for keeping a record of all its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection. He or she shall publish annually a report approved by the retirement board showing the financial condition of the fund.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:15 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 25 of 31 (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.3), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-314. Duties of city solicitor. The city solicitor shall be the legal adviser and counsel of the retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.4), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-315. Amendment of plan. The city council shall have the right to amend the plan. The plan may not be altered or amended without consultation between the city council and the retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.5),
retirement board.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.5), 12-13-93) Sec. 6-316. Designation of beneficiary by members of plan. After joining the plan in accordance with section 60-341, each member shall designate, on such forms as are acceptable to the retirement board, one or more individuals, estates or trusts as his or her beneficiary under the plan, including contingent beneficiaries. The member may change his or her designated beneficiary at any time prior to retirement.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, §
time prior to retirement.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.6), 12-13-93; Ord. No. O-98-43, § I, 12-14-98) Sec. 6-317. Group annuity contract purchase authorized. The retirement board is hereby authorized and empowered to apply for and purchase from an insurance company, authorized to transact business in the state, a group annuity contract, in form approved by said retirement board, for the purpose of providing benefits to members of the plan. Such group annuity contract may contain a provision for
annuity contract may contain a provision for establishing separate accounts funding for the purpose of allocating thereto amounts paid to the insurer by the retirement board in connection with the plan for the future payment of retirement benefits in guaranteed fixed amounts.  (Ord. No. O-93-31, § I(7.7), 12-13-93) Secs. 6-318—6-340. Reserved. ARTICLE XI. SEWER BOARD OF REVIEW10  10Cross reference(s)—Sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 66.  State law reference(s)—Creation of sewer board of review
reference(s)—Creation of sewer board of review for city, and authority thereunder, P.L. 1962, ch. 254, § 19.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 26 of 31 Sec. 6-341. Powers and duties. The city sewer board of review shall have all the powers and duties hereinafter set out and as prescribed in P.L. 1962, ch. 254, as amended.  (Code 1971, § 18-16) Sec. 6-342. Officers. The sewer board of review shall elect from among its members a chairperson and a secretary at the first meeting after the organization and upon the appointment of any new member for a full term, and shall fill any
new member for a full term, and shall fill any vacancy that may occur in either office from any cause.  (Code 1971, § 18-17) Sec. 6-343. Clerk. The sewer board of review may appoint a clerk, who shall perform such administrative duties as may be prescribed by the board as well as all other duties prescribed by law.  (Code 1971, § 18-18) Sec. 6-344. Meetings. Meetings of the sewer board of review shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The
such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson may administer oaths.  (Code 1971, § 18-19) Sec. 6-345. Quorum. The presence of all three members shall be required to constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the sewer board of review.  (Code 1971, § 18-20) Sec. 6-346. Hearings to be public; notice of hearings. All hearings of the sewer board of review shall be open to the public. At least five days prior to the date scheduled for a hearing, notice shall be mailed to the
for a hearing, notice shall be mailed to the petitioner, and a copy of same shall be forwarded to the city sewer authority. In case of continuances of public hearings, notice of this fact must be sent to the petitioner and the city sewer authority.  (Code 1971, § 18-21) Sec. 6-347. Minutes and other records. The sewer board of review shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if such member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and
or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 27 of 31 examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be a public record.  (Code 1971, § 18-22) Sec. 6-348. Time limit for filing appeals. Within 60 days after mailing of notice of an assessment or charge under section 9 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter 254, or within 30 days after giving or mailing of notice of an order under section 17 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter
under section 17 of 1962 Public Laws, chapter 254, any person aggrieved by such assessment, charge or order may appeal to the sewer board of review.  (Code 1971, § 18-23) Sec. 6-349. Appeals to be in writing; timely filing. Appeals must be in writing on forms provided by the sewer board of review and shall be filed in the office of the board within the times specified above.  (Code 1971, § 18-24) Sec. 6-350. Docketing of appeals; order of hearing; hearing continued matters. All appeals filed
hearing continued matters. All appeals filed with the sewer board of review shall be numbered, docketed and assigned by the clerk for hearing in the order in which received. All continued matters shall be heard prior to the matters docketed at any meeting.  (Code 1971, § 18-25) Sec. 6-351. Determination of number of appeals to be heard at each meeting. The sewer board of review shall determine the number of appeals that may be assigned for hearing to any particular meeting.  (Code 1971, §
hearing to any particular meeting.  (Code 1971, § 18-26) Sec. 6-352. Powers regarding appeals. The sewer board of review shall have power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an assessment, charge or order of the city sewer authority is unwarranted in whole or in part, and shall annul or modify the same and make such order as justice may require. Otherwise it shall affirm the same.  (Code 1971, § 18-27) Sec. 6-353. Executive session; deferment of decision; majority vote required.
deferment of decision; majority vote required. The merits of any petition may be discussed by the sewer board of review in executive session; provided, however, that all decisions of the board shall be made in open session. The board in its discretion may reserve consideration and decision to a later date. All decisions shall be made by majority vote.  (Code 1971, § 18-28)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 28 of 31 Sec. 6-354. Notice of decision. Notice of the sewer board's decision shall be sent to the petitioner and a copy of same forwarded to the city sewer authority.  (Code 1971, § 18-29) Sec. 6-355. Filing new petition for same premises or subject matter. No new petition pertaining to the same premises or subject matter involved in a decision of the sewer board of review may be heard until the expiration of two years from the date
until the expiration of two years from the date of such decision.  (Code 1971, § 18-30) Secs. 6-356—6-380. Reserved. ARTICLE XII. TREE COMMISSION11 Sec. 6-381. Jurisdiction; duties. (a) The city tree commission, hereinafter referenced as the "commission," shall have jurisdiction over all forestry functions, including the planting, care and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants, on the properties for which it is responsible. The commission shall do all acts necessary and proper for the care,
do all acts necessary and proper for the care, management, improvement, maintenance and protection of the public park and street trees under its jurisdiction.  (b) The duties of the commission shall be interpreted to include, but not be limited to, the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees on public property, and making such recommendations from time to time to the city council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the city.  (Code 1971, §
and activities for the city.  (Code 1971, § 25-3) Sec. 6-382. Appointment and qualifications of tree warden. The tree warden shall be appointed by the city tree commission. This person shall have training and experience in arboriculture and shall have passed the state arborist exam.  (Code 1971, § 25-4(a)) Secs. 6-383—6-400. Reserved.  11Cross reference(s)—Trees, ch. 78.  PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ARTICLE XIII. RESERVED
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 29 of 31 ARTICLE XIII. RESERVED12 Secs. 6-401—6-419. Reserved. ARTICLE XIV. RESERVED13 Secs. 6-420—6-439. Reserved. ARTICLE XV. AIRPORT LAND USE COMMISSIONS Sec. 6-440. Statement of purpose. The city desires to be a good neighbor with the T.F. Green State Airport in promoting its economic vitality, and in promoting the use and enjoyment of said airport for our citizens.  At the same time, the
airport for our citizens.  At the same time, the city recognizes the adverse impact that the expansion of T.F. Green Airport has had to our surrounding neighborhoods. The city further recognizes that this problem is significant and has far reaching implications including, but not limited to, the following:  (1) It adversely impacts the health, safety and welfare of the residents surrounding the airport;  (2) It reduces the fair market value of homes in the city;  (3) Vital tax dollars are lost
in the city;  (3) Vital tax dollars are lost in perpetuity to the city when homes and land are purchased by the state airport corporation, which is a tax exempt entity;  (4) The haphazard purchase of property around T.F. Green based on noise contour lines creates an inefficient land-use pattern in and around the airport;  (5) It threatens our economic vitality by placing an increased tax burden on the remaining commercial and residential property owners;  (6) It destroys the intrinsic visual
owners;  (6) It destroys the intrinsic visual beauty of the landscape; and  (7) It increases traffic, increases noise and air pollution, creates safety concerns, and leads to deteriorating roadways.   12Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. O-13-7, § I, adopted June 12, 2013, repealed §§ 6-401—6-405, which pertained to growth management coordinating council and derived from Ord. No. O-00-11, § I, 4-11-00; Ord. No. O-01-23, § I, 12-26-01.  13Editor's note(s)—Ordinance No. O-02-18, § I, adopted August 13,
No. O-02-18, § I, adopted August 13, 2002, repealed §§ 6-420—6-427 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to juvenile hearing board for truancy and derived from Ord. No. O-97-25, § I, 11-10-97.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 30 of 31 Therefore, it is clear that in order to protect the quality of life around T.F. Green Airport, city officials must work to develop effective mechanisms to control airport expansion in and around T.F. Green Airport.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-441. Creation of airport land use commission. There is hereby established a neighborhood buyout commission, which shall act as an advisory commission to city officials and
as an advisory commission to city officials and as a liaison between and among the state airport corporation, the community noise advisory committee, and the citizens of the city in order to develop a framework for coordinated and consistent planning for the control and development of land use patterns in and around the airport.  The commission will also consider initiatives that will enable the city to lay a realistic foundation for sustainable growth of T.F. Green Airport while protecting the
growth of T.F. Green Airport while protecting the quality of life for residents of the city. These initiatives should include, but are not limited to:  (1) Promoting greater citizen involvement in the planning process around the airport;  (2) Examining initiatives for alleviating noise and air pollution for neighborhoods surrounding the airport;  (3) If neighborhoods so desire, assisting them in marketing their land as a whole in order to increase the fair market value of their individual
the fair market value of their individual properties which may include assistance with comprehensive plan amendments and/or zone changes;  (4) Examining the city's infrastructure capacity and setting guidelines for future expansion of T.F. Green Airport, including the development of noise compatibility overlay zones;  (5) Promoting an active approach to the acquisition of land for open space and recreation to act as buffer zones between the airport and residential neighborhoods, and  (6) To
and residential neighborhoods, and  (6) To work with neighborhood residents, whose properties are being bought out and RIAC to address the following concerns:  a. Establishing a written time table which residents can rely upon to determine when individual homes will be purchased;  b. Providing the residents with information as to how the fair market value of their homes and property will be determined; and  c. Providing residents with an informational booklet as to their rights and
an informational booklet as to their rights and responsibilities pursuant to the buyout program.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-442. Members. The membership of the commission shall be the following:  (1) Each member of the city council;  (2) The director of the planning department of the city or his or her designee who shall attend each meeting of the commission;  (3) The city council constituent liaison who shall attend each meeting of the commission and be a non-voting member of the
the commission and be a non-voting member of the commission;
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:16 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 31 of 31 (4) The Executive Director of the Rhode Island Airport Corporation, or his or her designee, who shall be a non-voting member of the commission; and  (5) Two citizens of the City of Warwick who shall be appointed by the president of the city council.  No member of the commission shall receive any compensation by reason of his or her service on the commission.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-04-1, § I, 2-10-04;
§ I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-04-1, § I, 2-10-04; Ord. No. O-05-17, § I, 6-22-05; Ord. No. O-08-9, § I, 3-11-08) Sec. 6-443. Funding. Funding for the commission shall be in such amounts as may be determined by the city council and the mayor for the purposes set forth herein from year to year.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00) Sec. 6-444. Meetings and rules of procedure. (a) The commission shall meet once each quarter, and shall comply with the provisions of the open meetings law. A meeting may also
of the open meetings law. A meeting may also be called by the chairperson of the commission.  (b) Four of the members of said commission shall constitute a quorum, and its proceedings shall be open to the public. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and one of its members as its vice-chairperson, who shall serve for a term of one year each. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding
the vice-chairperson shall be the presiding officer. A majority of the voting members present shall be required to take any action. Any member wishing to place a matter on the agenda for consideration and/or discussion by the commission at a future meeting, shall submit a brief description of the matter in writing to the chairperson or vice-chairperson no less than 48 hours prior to said meeting. The commission shall have the power from time to time to draft rules governing its proceedings or
time to draft rules governing its proceedings or to amend or repeal any rules thereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with this section.  (Ord. No. O-00-19, § I, 5-16-00; Ord. No. O-05-17, § II, 6-22-05)
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Chapter 4 ANIMALS AND FOWL
Warwick, Rhode Island, Code of Ordinances    Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 1 of 24 Chapter 4 ANIMALS AND FOWL1 ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL Sec. 4-1. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings designated in this section:  Animal control officer means the person or persons employed by the city as its enforcement officer, and shall include any police officer of the city.  At large. Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when he/she is off
shall be deemed to be at large when he/she is off the property of his/her owner and not under control of a competent person.  City public pound means any premises designated by action of the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in violation of this chapter.  Exposed to rabies. A dog has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known to have been infected with rabies.  Kennel
known to have been infected with rabies.  Kennel means any person engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding dogs.  Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or dogs.  Restraint. A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter when it is:  (1) Leashed;  (2) Within a motor vehicle; or  (3) Within a suitable enclosure.  Spayed female means any bitch which has been operated upon to prevent conception.  (Code 1971, § 3-1) Cross
to prevent conception.  (Code 1971, § 3-1) Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2.  Sec. 4-2. Exemptions from chapter. Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated.  (Code 1971, § 3-2)  1Cross reference(s)—Animal control fines and fees, § 18-1; housing code requirements regarding rodent control, § 26-411 et seq.; permit required for horses
§ 26-411 et seq.; permit required for horses going on playgrounds or public property, § 40-20; violations of animal regulations, § 42-13; horses prohibited in public recreation facilities during certain months, § 58-12.  State law reference(s)—Animals generally, G.L. 1956, § 4-1-1 et seq.; regulatory dog ordinances, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1; registration and licensing of dogs, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-4 et seq.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:12 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 2 of 24 Sec. 4-3. Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer of the city and any police officer of the city.  (Code 1971, § 3-3) Sec. 4-4. Filing complaints. All complaints made under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the animal control officer and may be made orally; provided, however, that such complaint is made within 48 hours, reduced to writing on forms provided by
48 hours, reduced to writing on forms provided by the animal control officer, and shall be signed by the complainant showing his/her address and telephone number, if any.  (Code 1971, § 3-4) Sec. 4-5. Authority to enter premises and take up animals. In the discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, the animal control officer or any police officer of this city shall have the authority at all reasonable times to enter upon any premises (but such authority shall not include the right to
such authority shall not include the right to enter any residence on such premises) to examine a dog or other animal which is allegedly in violation of a provision of this chapter. Such officer shall have the further authority to take possession of any such dog or other animal and remove it from such premises.  (Code 1971, § 3-5) Sec. 4-6. Interference with or attempting to remove animal from animal control officer or police officer. No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal
shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any police officer of this city in the performance of his/her duties, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer or any police officer, except as herein provided.  (Code 1971, § 3-6) Sec. 4-7. Records to be kept by animal control officer. (a) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all
records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his/her custody.  (b) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him/her and his/her investigation of the same.  (c) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all monies belonging to the city, which records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by
be open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the city and which shall be audited by the city annually in the same manner as other city records are audited.  (Code 1971, § 3-7)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 3 of 24 Sec. 4-8. Restraint of dogs required at all times. The owner shall keep his/her dog under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises or property of the owner, unless under the control of a competent person.  (Code 1971, § 3-8) Sec. 4-9. Dogs prohibited on school property, Oakland Beach Common and city athletic fields; removal of waste deposited by dogs. (a) [Dogs prohibited in
waste deposited by dogs. (a) [Dogs prohibited in schoolyards, Oakland Beach Common and athletic fields.] No dogs are allowed in schoolyards or on school property whether at large or under restraint, except so-called Seeing Eye dogs; further, for reasons of public health and safety, dogs shall not be permitted on city athletic fields or on Oakland Beach Common.  (b) Duties to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to immediately remove and then dispose
a dog to immediately remove and then dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area. It shall further be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to immediately remove and then dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person.  (c) Duty to possess means of removal. No person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or
with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area without the means of removal of any feces left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the means of removal of any feces left by said dog.  (d) Method of removal and disposal. For the purpose of this regulation, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of
or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces, or to a place specifically reserved for the disposal of canine feces.  (e) Exemption. This regulation shall not apply to a licensed dog accompanying any handicapped person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with
handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirement of this section.  (f) [Violation.] Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00, which fine shall be paid directly to the city's municipal court as provided in section 42-13.  (Code 1971, § 3-9; Ord. No. O-95-5, 4-10-95; Ord. No. O-04-21, § I, 8-3-04; Ord. No. O-09-29, § I, 10-15-09) Sec. 4-10. Dogs prohibited in stores and eating places; exception. No dogs are allowed in any stores or eating places within
are allowed in any stores or eating places within the city, whether at large or under restraint, except those assistive animals specifically trained by a certified training program to assist a person with a disability to perform independent living tasks.  (Code 1971, § 3-10)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 4 of 24 Sec. 4-11. Maximum number of dogs and cats; exception. (a) No owner, lessee or occupant shall keep or permit to be kept more than three dogs over 12 weeks in age on any lot or parcel of land. For purposes of this section, multiple lots in common ownership are deemed to be a single parcel of land.  (b) No owner, lessee or occupant shall keep or permit to be kept more than three cats over 12 weeks in age on any lot or parcel of
cats over 12 weeks in age on any lot or parcel of land. For purposes of this section, multiple lots in common ownership are deemed to be a single parcel of land.  (c) An owner, lessee or occupant shall not be in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section if a permit to keep a greater number has been granted by the board of public safety, which board shall grant such permission only after hearing, with notice to owners of property abutting the premises, and only if, after a report from
the premises, and only if, after a report from the animal control officer and such other information as the permit applicant and abutters wish to present, the board shall determine that the number requested will not constitute a health hazard or nuisance.  (d) Upon being apprised of a violation of either subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the animal control officer shall send written notice of the violation by registered mail to the owner, lessee or occupant informing such person of the
lessee or occupant informing such person of the right to apply by letter through the animal control officer to the board of public safety for a permit. If more than 14 days have passed after the notice has been sent and no application for a permit has been received by the animal control officer and the owner, lessee or occupant continues to own, lease or occupy property in violation of subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section, then prosecution for violation of this section may be
prosecution for violation of this section may be commenced in the city municipal court.  (e) Any person found in violation of either subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 18-1, per day or where appropriate, the municipal court may impose a sentence in jail and impose a fine or both as set forth in G.L. § 45-2-19, which established the municipal court.  Any person who, having obtained a permit in accordance with subsection (c) of this
permit in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, violates the terms of that permit, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 18-1, per day or where appropriate, the municipal court may impose a sentence in jail and impose a fine or both as set forth in G.L. § 45-2-19, which established the municipal court.  (Code 1971, § 3-11; Ord. No. O-11-5, § I, 4-26-11) Sec. 4-12. Confinement of dangerous dogs and female animals in heat; impoundment; reclamation. (a) The owner of every
impoundment; reclamation. (a) The owner of every vicious dog shall adhere to all restrictions put upon such dog by the vicious dog panel.  (b) Every female dog or other animal in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such a manner that such female dog or other animal cannot come in contact with another dog or animal, except for intentional breeding purposes.  (c) Any animal described in the foregoing subsections of this
described in the foregoing subsections of this section, found at large, shall be impounded by the animal control officer and may not be reclaimed by the owner, unless such reclamation be authorized by any court having jurisdiction.  (d) Any dog or other animal may, the first time it is impounded for being a public nuisance, be reclaimed as provided in this chapter, but may not be reclaimed when so impounded on second or subsequent occasions unless such reclamation is authorized by a court
unless such reclamation is authorized by a court having jurisdiction in the matter.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 5 of 24 (e) When, in the judgment of the animal control officer or any police officer in this city, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be reclaimed.  (Code 1971, § 3-12; Ord. No. O-09-32, § I, 12-20-09; Ord. No. O-17-15, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-13. Keeping or feeding wild animals; destruction of escaped wild animals. (a) No wild animal may be kept within the city limits, except under such conditions as
the city limits, except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the animal control officer; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos, and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the animal control officer. Any wild animal which escapes and is found at large may be destroyed by the animal control officer or any police officer of this city.  (b) The feeding of wild coyotes within city limits is
The feeding of wild coyotes within city limits is prohibited and punishable utilizing provisions of section 1-4 in the Code of Ordinances.  (c) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall cause or allow to be left or stored outside of an occupied dwelling any refuse, garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement, salt, seed or birdseed, fruit, grain in a manner that would constitute an attractant to any wild animal.  (d) Notwithstanding the above, feeding of
(d) Notwithstanding the above, feeding of squirrels and birds of the order Passeriformes (i.e. "perching birds" including, but not limited to, songbirds) but not including carnivorous birds or waterfowl shall be permitted exclusively from elevated bird/squirrel feeders providing seed, grain, fruit, worms or suet for birds or squirrels located within 100 feet of an occupied dwelling during such times and in such quantities that: (1) Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance or
does not create an unreasonable disturbance or nuisance that affects the rights of surrounding property owners; or, (2) Is not an attractant for rats, skunks, foxes, weasels, or coyotes. Feeding of birds of the family Trochilidae (i.e. hummingbirds) shall be permitted exclusively from elevated bird feeders providing food suitable for such birds.  (e) Notwithstanding the above, feed that is deposited by natural vegetation or found solely as a result of normal agricultural or gardening practices
of normal agricultural or gardening practices is not a violation of this section.  (f) Any person violating any provision of subsection (c) of section 4-13 shall be subject to a warning only for a first violation within a one-year period. A second violation within a one-year period shall be punishable by a fine of up to $250.00. Third and subsequent violations within a one-year period shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Any such violation shall be
more than $500.00. Any such violation shall be considered a civil offense as opposed to a criminal offense.  (Code 1971, § 3-13; Ord. No. O-09-33, § I, 12-20-09; Ord. No. O-19-1, § I, 3-21-19) Sec. 4-14. Noisy animals; animals destroying property; nuisance animals generally. (a) The keeping or harboring of any dog or other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys any person or neighborhood, is unlawful, and is hereby
or neighborhood, is unlawful, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.  (b) It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any animal to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value, and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any such animal may be impounded by the animal control officer. Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by one or more persons having separate residences, or regularly employed in the neighborhood, that any
regularly employed in the neighborhood, that any animal is an habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing, howling, barking, or other noise, or damage to property, or by reason of being vicious or by its actions potentially vicious, or in any other manner causing undue annoyance,
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 6 of 24 the animal control officer, if he/she finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such nuisance must be abated.  (Code 1971, § 3-14) Cross reference(s)—Noise, § 40-13.  Sec. 4-15. Burial of dead animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried the body of any horse, ox, mule, cow, bull, sheep, dog or other large animal within the city limits, unless every part and
within the city limits, unless every part and portion of such body shall be at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground where the same is buried and such burial is done in conformity with the requirements of the state veterinarian.  (Code 1971, § 3-15) Sec. 4-16. Disposal of dead animal or animal substance in pond, well or other source of water. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, put or place in any pond, river, stream or other collection of water in the
river, stream or other collection of water in the city, any dead animal or creature of any kind whatsoever or any animal substance, or to deposit the same in any well, pool, cistern or spring of water used by any person or family for household purposes or otherwise.  (Code 1971, § 3-16) Sec. 4-17. Penalty. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by the payment of a fine as provided in G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1, to be
a fine as provided in G.L. 1956, § 4-13-1, to be recovered for the use of the city. Each day's violation may constitute a separate offense.  (Code 1971, § 3-17; Ord. No. O-98-37, § I, 10-19-98) Sec. 4-18. Destruction of animals. Destruction of animals in a gas chamber is prohibited. All animals which are euthanized within the city shall be done so by lethal injection.  (Ord. No. O-01-20, § I, 10-10-01) Sec. 4-19. Minimum care of animals. (a) An owner or guardian of any animal must provide daily
or guardian of any animal must provide daily proper nourishment and access to adequate water at a drinkable temperature, quality and quantity as required by the species, breed, size and age of the said animal, which will allow and foster normal growth and maintenance of body weight.  (b) An owner or guardian of any animal must maintain a sanitary environment, which is dry and free of accumulated feces, and free of debris and garbage that may clutter the environment so as not to inhibit
may clutter the environment so as not to inhibit comfortable rest, normal posture and range of movement or pose a danger to or entangle an animal, this as set by the industry standard for the environmental health scale as set forth in the most recently adopted version of the Tufts Animal Care and Conditions Scale (TACC).
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 7 of 24 (c) An owner or guardian of any animal must maintain said animal's health with minimum veterinary care, and a healthy physical condition as set by the industry standard for the body condition scale, and physical care scale as set forth in the most recently adopted version of the Tufts Animal Care and Conditions Scale (TACC).  (Ord. No. O-09-31, § I, 10-20-09) Sec. 4-20. Sheltering, tethering and nourishment of dogs. (a) No
tethering and nourishment of dogs. (a) No person shall allow a dog to be kept outside tethered, penned, caged, fenced, or otherwise confined for more than 30 minutes without access to adequate shelter or adequate water or food for use by such dog.  (b) No person shall allow a dog to be kept outside tethered, penned, caged, fenced, or otherwise confined for more than 30 minutes when the ambient temperature is beyond the industry standard for the weather safety scale as set forth in the most
the weather safety scale as set forth in the most recently adopted version of the Tufts Animal Care and Conditions Scale (TACC).  (Ord. No. O-09-31, § I, 10-20-09) Sec. 4-21. Penalties for violations. Any violation of sections 4-19 or 4-20 shall result in a fine of $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 and seizure of animal for a second violation, and $400.00 and the seizure of the animal for a third violation. Second and subsequent violations of sections 4-19 or 4-20 may be considered a
of sections 4-19 or 4-20 may be considered a violation of G.L. § 4-1-2.  (Ord. No. O-09-31, § I, 10-20-09) Sec. 4-22. Pet stores—Prohibition of the sale of dogs and cats. (a) Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]  Commercial establishment means any for profit business enterprise, including a sole proprietorship engaged in retail or
a sole proprietorship engaged in retail or wholesale commerce related to dogs and cats, including grooming parlors, canine day care, and boarding facilities.  Non-profit rescue organization means any Rhode Island non-profit corporation that is exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(3) whose mission and practice is, in whole and significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs or cats; or any non-profit organization that is not exempt from taxation under Internal
that is not exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(3) but is currently an active rescue partner with a city shelter or humane society, whose mission is, in whole and significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs or cats.  (b) It is unlawful for any person to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, give away, transfer, or sell any live dog or cat in any pet store, retail business or other commercial establishment located in the city.  (c) Nothing in this
located in the city.  (c) Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner, operator, or employees of a pet store, retail business, or other commercial establishment located in the city from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a city animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, or non-profit rescue organization and maintain those animals at the pet store retail business or other commercial establishment for the purpose of public adoption.  (Ord. No. O-17-21, §
purpose of public adoption.  (Ord. No. O-17-21, § I, 7-18-17)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 8 of 24 Sec. 4-23. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each separate offense or community service for a period of not more than 90 days or any combination of fine and/or community service. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be subject to penalties as provided herein for each separate offense.  (Ord. No. O-17-21, § I, 7-18-17) Secs. 4-24—4-40. Reserved. ARTICLE II. IMPOUNDMENT Sec. 4-41. Disposition of animals other than dogs found at large. Any animal, other than a dog, found running at large within the city limits may be impounded or disposed of according to law when such action is required either
to law when such action is required either to protect the animal or to protect the residents of the city.  (Code 1971, § 3-28) Sec. 4-42. Impoundment of dogs at large. Any dog found running at large shall be taken up by the animal control officer, and impounded in the shelter designated as the city public pound.  (Code 1971, § 3-29) Sec. 4-43. Citation in lieu of impoundment. When dogs are found running at large, and their ownership is known to the animal control officer, such dogs need not be
the animal control officer, such dogs need not be impounded, but such officer may cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer to charges of violation of this article.  (Code 1971, § 3-30) Sec. 4-44. Notice of impoundment. Immediately upon impounding any dog, the animal control officer shall make every possible reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dog so impounded, and inform such owner of the conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of such dog.  (Code 1971, §
may regain custody of such dog.  (Code 1971, § 3-31) Sec. 4-45. Impoundment period. Dogs impounded pursuant to this article in the animal pound may be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than seven days.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 9 of 24 (Code 1971, § 3-32) Sec. 4-46. Redemption of impounded animals; payment of fee. The owner of any impounded dog or animal shall be entitled to regain possession of such beast, except as otherwise provided, upon the payment of an impoundment fee as established by the board of public safety and as provided in chapter 18. Said fee shall be in addition to any pecuniary penalty for violation of this chapter and/or state law.  (Code
of this chapter and/or state law.  (Code 1971, § 3-33) Sec. 4-47. Establishment of fees. The board of public safety is hereby authorized and empowered to establish a fee for each day an animal is kept after the day of impoundment. The board shall establish the charge based upon the reasonable cost of keeping such animals per day, and the charge may be adjusted from time to time to reflect any change in the reasonable cost of keeping such animals per day.  (Code 1971, § 3-34) Sec. 4-48.
animals per day.  (Code 1971, § 3-34) Sec. 4-48. Disposition of unclaimed animals. Any dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article and not reclaimed by its owner within seven days may be humanely disposed of or destroyed by the animal control officer, have its title transferred to another licensed releasing agency after the legal detention period has run and if such dog has not been claimed by the owner, or may be placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a
in the custody of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the city. However, if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by state law, such law shall be complied with.  (Code 1971, § 3-35; Ord. No. O-17-17, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-49. Destruction of animals by the animal control officer.
of animals by the animal control officer. Destruction of animals by the animal control officer in a gas chamber is prohibited. All animals which are euthanized by the animal control officer shall be done by lethal injection.  (Ord. No. O-00-13, § I, 4-11-00) Sec. 4-50. Unrestricted and aggressive dogs prohibited. (a) Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by any two persons having separate residence or regularly employed in the neighborhood or if the animal control office or a police officer
if the animal control office or a police officer determine that any dog is being aggressive without provocation by its actions such as biting or attacking a human or any animal or in an aggressive or terrorizing manner approaches a person or animal in an apparent display of attack, the animal control officer or the police shall have the authority to issue violations and/or impound said dog and/or service notice upon the owner or custodian that such vicious action must be abated.  (b) It is
such vicious action must be abated.  (b) It is unlawful for any owner of an aggressive dog to place that dog or allow it to be placed in the custody of any other person not physically capable of maintaining effective control of restricting the dog.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 10 of 24 (c) The penalty for violating the provisions of this section shall be a fine not exceeding $250.00 for the first offense; not exceeding $350.00 for the second offense; and a mandatory court appearance and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for the third offense. A fine may only be levied after an investigation into the incident is conducted by animal control or police and the owner or keeper of said dog is deemed to be negligent in
keeper of said dog is deemed to be negligent in their actions.  (d) An owner shall not be deemed negligent if an injury or damage is sustained by an animal which has trespassed onto the property where the dog resides or a person who, at the time that injury or damage was sustained, was committing a trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, provoking, abusing, or assaulting the dog or was attempting to commit a crime.  (Ord. No.
or was attempting to commit a crime.  (Ord. No. O-17-29, § I, 11-7-17) Secs. 4-51—4-70. Reserved. ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL2 Sec. 4-71. Exemption from article. The licensing and vaccination requirements of this article shall not apply to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the city, which dog is kept within the city for not longer than 30 days. However, all such dogs shall at all times while in the city be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle, or be under restraint by the owner.
or vehicle, or be under restraint by the owner.  (Code 1971, § 3-46) Sec. 4-72. Owning or harboring unvaccinated animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog, cat or ferret over six months old within the city, unless such dog shall have been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article.  (Code 1971, § 3-47; Ord. No. O-17-16, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-73. Vaccination required for dogs, cats or ferrets over six months of age. No dog over six
ferrets over six months of age. No dog over six months old shall be permitted within the city limits unless such animal shall have been vaccinated or immunized in the manner set forth in this article within a period of 12 months, if such animal shall have been vaccinated or immunized with the one-year vaccine, or within a period of 36 months, if such animal shall have been vaccinated or immunized by the three-year vaccine.  (Code 1971, § 3-48; Ord. No. O-17-16, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-74. Use of
Ord. No. O-17-16, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-74. Use of approved vaccine; certification of vaccination. The vaccination or immunization referred to in section 4-73 shall be by a vaccine approved by the state department of health and shall be certified to by a licensed veterinarian. Such certificate shall be dated as of the  2State law reference(s)—Rabies examination, G.L. 1956, § 4-13-26.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 11 of 24 date of inoculation or vaccination, shall show the rabies tag number, the sex and breed of the dog, cat or ferret and the owner thereof, and whether the vaccine given is the one-year vaccine or the three-year vaccine, together with such other information as may reasonably be required by the state veterinarian or the veterinarian administering the same.  (Code 1971, § 3-49; Ord. No. O-17-16, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-75.
3-49; Ord. No. O-17-16, § I, 7-18-17) Sec. 4-75. Vaccination certificate prerequisite to issuance of dog license; public vaccination clinics. No license shall be issued for any dog required to be licensed in the city unless the person making application therefor shall first present to the police department or other person duly authorized to issue such license a current certificate of vaccination or inoculation, as provided in this article, for the dog for which such license is requested. Such
the dog for which such license is requested. Such certificate shall certify that the dog for which the license is to be issued has been properly vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article. Public clinics providing inoculations at a nominal charge shall be made available twice a year by the board of public safety.  (Code 1971, § 3-50) Sec. 4-76. Impounding of unvaccinated dogs. (a) Any dog over six months old found within the limits of the city without evidence
within the limits of the city without evidence that such dog has been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be impounded by any police officer of the city or other authorized person for a period not exceeding 15 days, during which time such dog may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog, and payment by such owner of the fees provided in this chapter.  (b) At the expiration of the 15-day period above mentioned, any dog
of the 15-day period above mentioned, any dog not so claimed by its owner may be disposed of in accordance with this chapter.  (Code 1971, § 3-51) Sec. 4-77. Responsibility of veterinarians to report rabies suspects. It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control officer any animal considered by him/her to be a rabies suspect.  (Code 1971, § 3-52) Sec. 4-78. Reports of bite cases. It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to
every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the animal control officer at the police department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.  (Code 1971, § 3-53)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 12 of 24 Sec. 4-79. Disposition of biting animals and rabies suspects. (a) Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of 14 days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. At the discretion of the animal control officer,
At the discretion of the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the city public pound, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his/her choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated by the animal control officer.  (b) The owner, upon demand by the animal control officer, shall forthwith surrender any
control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the fees set forth in this chapter.  (c) If an animal bites a person and such animal has not been properly vaccinated, such animal shall be quarantined at the city public pound. Prior to its
at the city public pound. Prior to its return to the owner, the animal shall be properly inoculated at the direction of the officer in charge of the shelter and the costs of such inoculation shall be borne by the owner of the animal in addition to the cost of the quarantine.  (Code 1971, § 3-54) Sec. 4-80. Handling of dogs bitten by known rabid animal. Dogs bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict
unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel for six months shall be enforced. If the dog has been previously vaccinated, within time limits established by the state veterinarian based on the kind of vaccine used, revaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for 30 days shall be carried out.  (Code 1971, § 3-55) Sec. 4-81. Testing of head of dead suspected rabid animal; procedure upon positive diagnosis; general quarantine and immunization. (a)
general quarantine and immunization. (a) When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for the pathological examination, and shall notify the state veterinarian of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis.  (b) When one or both reports indicate a positive diagnosis of
or both reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer shall recommend an areawide quarantine for a period of 90 days, and, upon invoking of such emergency quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the animal control officer.  (c) During this quarantine period and as long afterward as
this quarantine period and as long afterward as he/she decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the state veterinarian shall require all dogs, three months of age and older, to be vaccinated against rabies with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the Geologics Control Section of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The types of approved canine antirabies vaccine to be used and the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be established by the state veterinarian. All
be established by the state veterinarian. All vaccinated dogs shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period,
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 13 of 24 the state veterinarian shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the city.  (d) No dog which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, is allowed to be claimed during the period of the rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the state
except by special authorization of the state veterinarian and the animal control officer.  (e) In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six months.  (Code 1971, § 3-56) Sec. 4-82. Surrender of animal for quarantine or destruction. No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the
herein when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer.  (Code 1971, § 3-57) Sec. 4-83. Animal control officer to dispose of rabid animals. The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies.  (Code 1971, § 3-58) Sec. 4-84. Surrender of carcass of dead rabid animal. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control officer.  (Code 1971, § 3-59) Sec. 4-85. Killing or removal from
1971, § 3-59) Sec. 4-85. Killing or removal from city of rabid animal, suspected rabid animal, or animal biting human. No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, or remove any such animal from the city limits without written permission from the animal control officer.  (Code 1971, § 3-60) Secs. 4-86—4-110. Reserved. ARTICLE IV. ANIMAL CARE; SPAYING AND NEUTERING OF
ARTICLE IV. ANIMAL CARE; SPAYING AND NEUTERING OF DOGS AND CATS Sec. 4-111. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 14 of 24 (1) Protect the owners of dogs and cats from the sale or use of stolen pets;  (2) Ensure that all warmblooded vertebrate animals, as items of commerce, are provided humane care and treatment by regulating the transportation, sale, purchase, housing, care, handling and treatment of such animals by persons or organizations engaged in transporting, buying, or selling them for such use;  (3) Ensure that animals confined in pet
use;  (3) Ensure that animals confined in pet shops, kennels, animal shelters, auction markets and pounds are provided humane care and treatment;  (4) Release for sale, trade or adoption only those animals which appear to be free of infection, communicable disease, or abnormalities, unless veterinary care subsequent to release is assured; and  (5) Ensure the spaying and neutering of dogs and cats which are adopted from the releasing agency.  (Ord. No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.1), 5-9-94) Sec. 4-112.
No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.1), 5-9-94) Sec. 4-112. Definitions. As used in this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder, the following terms shall have the meanings designated in this section:  Adequate feed means the provision at suitable intervals, not to exceed 24 hours, of a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age, sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition in each animal. The foodstuff shall be served in a sanitized receptacle, dish or container.
in a sanitized receptacle, dish or container.  Adequate water means a constant access to a supply of clean, fresh potable water provided in a sanitary manner or provided at suitable intervals for the species and not to exceed 24 hours at any interval.  Adopt means the voluntary acquisition of and assumption of responsibility for a dog or a cat from a releasing agency.  Adopting party means any person who enters into a contract acquiring a dog or cat from a releasing agency.  Ambient temperature
cat from a releasing agency.  Ambient temperature means the temperature surrounding the animal.  Animal means any dog, cat, rabbit, rodent, nonhuman primate, bird or other warmblooded vertebrate, but shall not include horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine and domestic fowl.  Animal control officer means any person employed, contracted or appointed by the state or any political subdivision thereof for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this article or any other law or ordinance relating
article or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of dogs, control of dogs, or seizure and impoundment of dogs, and includes any state or municipal peace officer, animal control officer, sheriff, constable or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve the seizure or taking into custody of any dog.  Animal shelter means a facility which is used to house or contain animals and which is owned, operated or maintained by a duly incorporated humane
or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals.  Breeder means a person engaged in the propagation of purebred dogs and/or cats for the purpose of improving and enhancing a breed recognized and registered by the American Kennel Club, the American Field Stud Book or a registered cat breed association.  Dealer means any
cat breed association.  Dealer means any person who sells, exchanges, donates or offers to sell, exchange or donate animals to another dealer, pet shop or research facility; or who breeds dogs and/or cats for the purpose of selling or donating to another dealer or pet shop, or research facility.  Director means the director of environmental management of the state.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 15 of 24 Euthanasia means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during that loss of consciousness.  Hobby breeder means those persons whose regular occupation is not the breeding and raising of dogs and cats and whose method of sale
raising of dogs and cats and whose method of sale is at retail only.  Housing facility means any room, building or area used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures.  Kennel means a place or establishment other than a pound or animal shelter where animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered in return for a fee.  Neuter means to surgically render a male dog or cat unable to reproduce.  Pet shop means an establishment where animals are bought, sold, exchanged or
where animals are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public at retail. This shall not include an establishment or person whose total sales are the offspring of canine or feline females maintained on their premises and sold from those premises.  Pound and dog pound mean a facility operated by the state, or any political subdivision thereof, for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals;
or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals; or a facility operated for that purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to animals.  Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment or hutch.  Public auction means any place or location where dogs or cats are sold at auction to the highest bidder, regardless of whether those
the highest bidder, regardless of whether those dogs or cats are offered as individuals, as a group or by weight.  Releasing agency means any animal shelter, animal rescue league, pound, dog pound, animal control facility, animal control officer, humane society, or society for the prevention of cruelty to animals.  Research facility means any place, laboratory or institution at which scientific tests, investigations or experiments involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted
use of living animals are carried out, conducted or attempted.  Sanitize means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health.  Sexual maturity is achieved when a female dog or cat reaches six months of age and when a male dog or cat reaches eight months of age; in all instances the releasing agency will determine the age of the dog or cat.  Spay means to surgically render a female dog or cat unable to reproduce.  State veterinarian means
unable to reproduce.  State veterinarian means a licensed veterinarian from the department of environmental management.  (Ord. No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.2), 5-9-94) Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2.  Sec. 4-113. Mandatory spaying and neutering of dogs and cats adopted from a licensed releasing agency. (a) (1) No licensed releasing agency shall release, sell, trade, give away, exchange, adopt out, or otherwise transfer with or without a fee any dog or cat that has not been spayed or
a fee any dog or cat that has not been spayed or neutered unless the adopting party executes a written agreement with the licensed releasing agency to have the dog or cat spayed or neutered in accordance with subdivisions (2) and (3).
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 16 of 24 (2) The licensed releasing agency is authorized to enter into a written adoption agreement with the adopting party provided that at the time of execution of the written agreement, the licensed releasing agency collect from the adopting party an amount equal to the cost to the licensed releasing agency for the spaying or neutering of the dog or cat to be adopted. The written agreement must include the dog or cat's age, sex,
agreement must include the dog or cat's age, sex, and general description; the date the adoption agreement was executed; the date by which the licensed releasing agency anticipates that the dog or cat will be spayed or neutered; the date by which the adoptive party shall claim the dog or cat; the adopting party's name, address, phone number, and signature; the licensed releasing agency's name, address, phone number, and the dollar amount remitted to the licensed releasing agency for the cost of
to the licensed releasing agency for the cost of spaying or neutering the dog or cat.  (3) After execution of the agreement, the licensed releasing agency shall cause the dog or cat to be spayed or neutered and, when medically fit, shall transfer custody of the dog or cat to the adopting party. Any dog or cat that is not claimed by the adoptive party within ten days of the date enumerated in the written adoption agreement shall be considered unclaimed and may be offered for adoption to another
and may be offered for adoption to another party.  (b) The following are exemptions from the provisions of subsection (a):  (1) A licensed releasing agency returns a stray dog or cat to its owner.  (2) A licensed releasing agency receives a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life of the dog or cat would be jeopardized by the surgery and that this health condition is likely to be permanent.  (3) A licensed releasing agency receives a written report from a licensed
agency receives a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that there is a temporary health condition, including sexual immaturity, which would make surgery life threatening to the dog or cat or impracticable, in which instance the licensed releasing agency shall enter into a written agreement for the spaying or neutering of the dog or cat upon resolution of the temporary health condition or the animal reaching maturity and shall collect from the adopting party an amount equal to the
from the adopting party an amount equal to the cost to the licensed releasing agency for the spaying or neutering of the dog or cat to be adopted. The licensed releasing agency may then allow the transfer of the dog or cat to the adopting party who shall return the dog or cat to the licensed releasing agency for spaying or neutering upon resolution of the temporary health condition or the animal reaching sexual maturity. The licensed releasing agency may grant the adopting party an appropriate
may grant the adopting party an appropriate extension of time in which to have the dog or cat spayed or neutered based on the veterinarian's report.  (4) A licensed releasing agency transfers a dog or cat to another licensed releasing agency.  (c) If requested to do so, a licensed releasing agency shall refund fees collected for the purpose of spaying or neutering the dog or cat to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented to the releasing agency by the adopting party that the
releasing agency by the adopting party that the dog or cat died before the spaying or neutering was required to be completed.  (d) Any and all licensed releasing agencies:  (1) May enter into cooperative agreements with each other and with veterinarians in carrying out this section; and  (2) Shall make a good faith effort to cause an adopting party to comply with this section.  (Ord. No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.3), 5-9-94; Ord. No. O-17-18, § I, 7-18-17; Ord. No. O-17-19, § I, 7-18-17)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 17 of 24 Sec. 4-114. Same—Use of forfeited deposits. Deposits required by section 4-113 which are unclaimed after 60 days from the date of adoption or 60 days from when the dog or cat reaches sexual maturity, whichever is later, will be forfeited by the adopting party and retained by the releasing agency and shall be used for the following purposes:  (1) A public education program to prevent overpopulation in dogs and cats;  (2) A
prevent overpopulation in dogs and cats;  (2) A program to spay and neuter dogs and cats that are available for adoption by the releasing agency;  (3) A followup program to ensure that dogs and cats adopted from the releasing agency are spayed or neutered; or  (4) To defray additional costs incurred by the releasing agency in complying with section 4-113.  (Ord. No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.4), 5-9-94) Sec. 4-115. Same—Violations; penalties; disposition of fines. (a) Violations by adopting party.
of fines. (a) Violations by adopting party. Violations of the provisions of section 4-113 or the written agreement executed pursuant thereto by an adopting party shall be punishable as provided in section 18-1. Each and every incidence of noncompliance by an adopting party which continues unremedied for 30 days after written notice of a violation hereunder shall constitute a subsequent offense and the attendant penalties will apply. Second and subsequent offenses may constitute grounds for
subsequent offenses may constitute grounds for seizure and forfeiture of the dog or cat, which seizure will be conducted by an animal control officer or a police officer for the city or town in which the adopting party resides, and the seized animal will be returned to the releasing agency from which it was adopted, which releasing agency will be free to adopt out or euthanize the seized dog or cat. The adopting party shall lose all ownership rights in the seized dog or cat, shall forfeit all
in the seized dog or cat, shall forfeit all rights to any fee or deposit paid for the dog or cat, and shall have no claim against the releasing agency or any other person for any expenses incurred by the adopting party for the dog or cat's maintenance. The provisions of sections 4-113 through 4-115 will be enforced against an adopting party by an animal control officer or a police officer for the city or town in which the adopting party resides.  (b) Violations by releasing agency. Violations
(b) Violations by releasing agency. Violations of the provisions of section 4-113 or 4-114 by a releasing agency shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00 for the first offense, $250.00 for the second offense and $500.00 for the third and subsequent offenses. The third and subsequent offenses may result in the temporary or permanent revocation of the releasing agency's license to operate. Compliance by the releasing agency with the provisions of sections 4-113 through 4-115 will be monitored as
sections 4-113 through 4-115 will be monitored as to the releasing agencies by the state veterinarian.  (c) Disposition of fines. All fines collected under subsection (a) of this section will be remitted to the town clerk or city clerk of the municipality where the adopting party of the dog or cat resides. Such fines shall be used by the municipality only for enforcing animal control laws or ordinances or for programs to reduce the population of unwanted stray dogs and cats in the municipality,
unwanted stray dogs and cats in the municipality, including humane education programs or programs for the spaying or neutering of dogs or cats. All fines collected under subsection (b) of this section will be remitted to the general treasurer and placed in a separate fund within the general fund to be called the "animal health fund," which shall be administered by the general treasurer in the same manner as the general fund. All funds deposited in the animal health fund shall be made available
in the animal health fund shall be made available to the state department of environmental management, division of agriculture, to defray any costs or expenses in incurred by the state veterinarian in the enforcement of sections 4-113, 4-114 and 4-115.  (Ord. No. O-94-10, § 1(3-61.5), 5-9-94)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 18 of 24 Sec. 4-116. Findings, purpose and intent. (a) The city council finds and determines that:  (1) An unacceptable number of healthy but abandoned cats are euthanized annually in Rhode Island.  (2) Due to the large number of stray and abandoned cats, euthanasia is not a cost effective, acceptable or ethical solution to the threats of public health and safety posed by large populations of stray domestic animals.  (3) Stray and
of stray domestic animals.  (3) Stray and abandoned pets, specifically cats, create numerous public health and safety problems, including transmission of disease and traffic hazards created by cats running loose on public streets.  (4) A license system for breeding of cats owned or harbored in the City of Warwick combined with a program for spaying/neutering is a reasonable and effective means of reducing the population of abandoned or stray cats, and for eliminating the practice of euthanizing
and for eliminating the practice of euthanizing homeless cats except those for whom euthanasia is an escape from suffering or necessary to protect people and/or other animals from vicious behavior.  (b) Declaration of intent. The city council hereby finds and declares that it intends to provide for the public health, safety and welfare through a program requiring spaying and neutering cats unless appropriate licenses are acquired.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § I, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-117. Spaying/neutering.
§ I, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-117. Spaying/neutering. (a) No person shall own or harbor within the city any cat over the age of six months which has not been spayed or neutered, unless such person holds a license to keep an unaltered cat, or a license for breeding cats issued by the director of the animal shelter of the City of Warwick.  (b) A license to breed and sell shall be issued to an individual for an unaltered cat if the owner pays a fee of $100.00 per cat per year with a signed application. All
per cat per year with a signed application. All funds from breeding licenses shall be deposited in the City of Warwick's Spay/Neuter Account to be managed by the Director of the Warwick Animal Shelter.  (c) Any person providing care or sustenance for a period of 30 days or longer shall be deemed the owner of such cat and shall adhere to the provision of this section.  (d) Subsection (c) above shall not be interpreted to apply to a person caring for a colony of feral cats if such person:  (1)
for a colony of feral cats if such person:  (1) Regularly feeds or arranges for the feeding of the colony, including on weekends and holidays;  (2) Traps or makes a reasonable effort to trap all feral cats over the age of eight weeks in his/her care, and has them spayed or neutered;  (3) Has all trapped cats tested for feline leukemia and has those who test positive humanely euthanized or isolated indoors;  (4) Identifies feral cats that have been spayed or neutered by means of ear notching,
been spayed or neutered by means of ear notching, ear tipping, or ear tagging; and  (5) Has all trapped cats vaccinated according to state and local laws.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § II, 1-9-06)
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 19 of 24 Sec. 4-118. Breeding licenses. (a) No person shall cause or allow any cat owned or harbored in the city to breed without first obtaining a breeding license under this section.  (b) The Director of the City of Warwick Animal Shelter shall administer a license program to allow breeding of cats consistent with criteria and according to procedures contained in the city ordinances.  (c) Each applicant who is issued a license to
(c) Each applicant who is issued a license to breed cats under this section shall pay a breeding license fee of $100.00 per year per cat.  (d) No person shall cause or allow the breeding of a male or female cat without first obtaining a breeding license issued by the Director of the Warwick Animal Shelter. Breeding licenses shall be valid for 12 months, renewable on an annual basis. Fees for such licenses shall be as set forth. All breeding licenses shall contain the following terms and
licenses shall contain the following terms and conditions and be subject to all of the following requirements:  (1) No offspring may be sold or adopted and permanently placed until reaching an age of at least eight weeks.  (2) Any license holder advertising to the public the availability of any cat for adoption or sale must prominently display the license number in any publications in which they advertise. Further, the license number must be provided to any person adopting or purchasing any cat
to any person adopting or purchasing any cat bred by the license holder.  (3) The breeding license holder shall adhere to minimum standards regarding the care and keeping of animals developed and approved by Rhode Island state law.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § III, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-119. Sale or adoption of cats. (a) Any person who provides or offers to the public, whether or not for compensation, any pet or pet related goods (where they are the primary products) or pet services shall provide to their
products) or pet services shall provide to their clients, free of charge, information relating to pet care and ownership, including information on city laws pertaining to animal control. This required information will be prepared and provided by the person offering the pet or related goods.  (b) Any person offering cats for sale or adoption shall disclose to any purchaser or adoptive owner information regarding the licensing requirements of the City of Warwick applicable to such cats.  (c) No
City of Warwick applicable to such cats.  (c) No person shall offer for sale or adoption any cat on any public street, sidewalk, or public park unless such person first obtains a license to sell pets or is a recognized pet rescue/adoption.  (d) Any cat adopted from any animal welfare agency shall be spayed or neutered as early as is medically appropriate, but no later than six months of age, unless the adoptive owner obtains a certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying as to the health
licensed veterinarian certifying as to the health reasons for failing to alter such animal, and the approximate date when the cat can be spayed or neutered.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § IV, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-120. Revocation of license. (a) Any license issued may be revoked if the director of the animal shelter has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true:
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:13 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 20 of 24 (1) The licensee has violated any state or local ordinances relating to the keeping, care or use of any animal.  (2) The licensee is in violation on any state health or safety law or regulation regarding animal care or control;  (3) The licensee has failed to comply with any condition or requirement of the license or has failed to pay any fee imposed under this article;  (4) The licensee refuses to allow inspection, upon 48
The licensee refuses to allow inspection, upon 48 hours written notice, of any cat covered by the permit;  (5) The licensee has transferred, sold or otherwise disposed of the cat for which the permit was issued.  (b) If, after investigation, the director of the animal shelter concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has occurred, it shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted by mail to the address of the licensee. Said notice shall specify the
of the licensee. Said notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation of the license and shall specify a date and time for an informal hearing to be held before the director of the animal shelter. Said date shall not be less than five days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed. After the informal hearing, the director of the animal shelter may modify the terms of the license or revoke the license.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § V, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-121. Penalty for violation. Any person who
Sec. 4-121. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this act shall have no more than 30 days to have their cat spayed or neutered. The director of the animal shelter may inform persons subject to this law to the availability of reduced cost or free of cost spay/neuter programs sponsored by local humane organizations. If an animal is not spayed or neutered within 30 days of notice they shall be subject to a $100.00 fine for each 30 days the subject animal is not spayed
for each 30 days the subject animal is not spayed or neutered.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § VI, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-122. Responsibility for enforcement. The director of the animal shelter shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of this ordinance, with the assistance of animal control.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § VII, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-123. Transition. Persons harboring a cat subject to this article on the date it becomes effective shall have 120 days from such date to comply herewith.  (Ord. No.
from such date to comply herewith.  (Ord. No. O-06-1, § VIII, 1-9-06) Sec. 4-124. Findings, purpose and intent. (a) The city council finds and determines that:  (1) There is over breeding of American Pitbull Terriers, American Staffordshire Terriers and dogs that are mixes of the two breeds.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 21 of 24 (2) Due to the large number of these dogs, euthanasia is not a cost effective, acceptable or ethical solution to the threats of public health and safety posed by large populations of these dogs.  (3) A license system for breeding of American Pitbull Terriers, American Staffordshire Terriers and dogs that are mixes of the two breeds in the City of Warwick, combined with a program for spaying/neutering, is a reasonable and
for spaying/neutering, is a reasonable and effective means of reducing the population of these dogs, and for eliminating the practice of euthanizing these dogs, which oftentimes are unwanted and abandoned, except where euthanasia is necessary to protect people and/or other animals from vicious behavior.  (b) Declaration of intent. The city council hereby finds and declares that it intends to provide for the public health, safety and welfare through a program requiring spaying and neutering of
a program requiring spaying and neutering of American Pitbull Terriers, American Staffordshire Terriers and mixes of the two breeds unless appropriate licenses are acquired.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-125. Spaying/neutering. (a) No person shall own or harbor within the city any American Pitbull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds over the age of six months, which has not been spayed or neutered, unless such person holds a license to keep
unless such person holds a license to keep an unaltered American Pitbull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds, or a license for breeding said dogs issued by the director of the animal shelter of the City of Warwick.  (b) A license to breed and sell shall be issued to an individual for an unaltered American Pitbull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds if the owner satisfies the following requirements:  (i)
owner satisfies the following requirements:  (i) Provide registration for the dog;  (ii) A conformation title or proof of entry in conformation dog shows on three separate occasions within two years or provide a valid contract from the dog's registered breeder prohibiting sterilization until the dog attains the age set forth in the contract;  (iii) Pay a fee of $100.00 per dog per year with a signed application.  All funds from breeding licenses shall be deposited in the City of Warwick's
shall be deposited in the City of Warwick's Spay/Neuter Account to be managed by the Director of the Warwick Animal Shelter.  (c) Any person providing care or sustenance for a period of 30 days or longer shall be deemed the owner of such dog and shall adhere to the provision of this section.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-126. Breeding licenses. (a) No person shall cause or allow any American Pitbull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds owned
or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds owned or harbored in the city to breed without first obtaining a breeding license under this section.  (b) The Director of the City of Warwick Animal Shelter shall administer a license program to allow breeding of these dogs consistent with criteria and according to procedures contained in the city ordinances.  (c) Each applicant who is issued a license to breed American Pitbull Terriers, American Staffordshire Terriers or dogs that are a mix of the two
Terriers or dogs that are a mix of the two breeds, under this section shall pay a breeding license fee of $100.00 per year per dog.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 22 of 24 (d) No person shall cause or allow the breeding of such male or female dog without first obtaining a breeding license issued by the Director of the Warwick Animal Shelter. Breeding licenses shall be valid for 12 months and are renewable on an annual basis. Fees for such licenses shall be as set forth herein. All breeding licenses shall contain the following terms and conditions and be subject to all of the following
conditions and be subject to all of the following requirements:  (1) No offspring may be sold or adopted and permanently placed until reaching an age of at least eight weeks.  (2) Any license holder advertising to the public the availability of such dog for adoption or sale must prominently display the license number in any publications in which they advertise. Further, the license number must be provided to any person adopting or purchasing any dog bred by the license holder.  (3) The breeding
dog bred by the license holder.  (3) The breeding license holder shall adhere to minimum standards regarding the care and keeping of animals developed and approved under Rhode Island state law.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-127. Sale or adoption of dogs. (a) Any person who provides or offers to the public, whether or not for compensation, any pet or pet related goods (where they are the primary products) or pet services shall provide to their clients, free of charge, information
to their clients, free of charge, information relating to pet care and ownership, including information on city laws pertaining to animal control. This required information will be prepared and provided by the person offering the pet or related goods.  (b) Any person offering an American Pitbull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or a dog that is a mix of the two breeds for sale or adoption shall disclose to any purchaser or adoptive owner information regarding the licensing requirements
information regarding the licensing requirements of the City of Warwick applicable to such dogs.  (c) No person shall offer for sale or adoption any such dog on any public street, sidewalk, or public park unless such person first obtains a license to sell pets or is a recognized pet rescue/adoption operator.  (d) Any such dog adopted from any animal welfare agency shall be spayed or neutered as early as is medically appropriate, but no later than six months of age, unless the adoptive owner
than six months of age, unless the adoptive owner obtains a certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying as to the health reasons for failing to alter such animal, and the approximate date when the dog can be spayed or neutered.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-128. Revocation of license. (a) Any license issued may be revoked if the director of the animal shelter has reasonable cause to believe any of the following to be true:  (1) The licensee has violated any state or local
(1) The licensee has violated any state or local ordinances relating to the keeping, care or use of any animal.  (2) The licensee is in violation on any state health or safety law or regulation regarding animal care or control;  (3) The licensee has failed to comply with any condition or requirement of the license or has failed to pay any fee imposed under this article;  (4) The licensee refuses to allow inspection, upon 48 hours written notice, of any dog covered by the permit;
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 23 of 24 (5) The licensee has transferred, sold or otherwise disposed of the dog for which the permit was issued.  (b) If, after investigation, the director of the animal shelter concludes that it is probable that one or more of the above grounds for revocation has occurred, it shall cause written notice thereof to be transmitted by mail to the address of the licensee. Said notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation of
specify the grounds of possible revocation of the license and shall specify a date and time for an informal hearing to be held before the director of the animal shelter. Said date shall not be less than five days subsequent to the date the notice is mailed. After the informal hearing, the director of the animal shelter may modify the terms of the license or revoke the license.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-129. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this act
person who violates the provisions of this act shall have no more than 30 days to have their dog spayed or neutered. The director of the animal shelter may inform persons subject to this law about the availability of reduced cost or free of cost spay/neuter programs sponsored by local humane organizations. If an animal is not spayed or neutered within 30 days of notice, they shall be subject to a $100.00 fine for each 30 days the subject animal is not spayed or neutered.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I,
not spayed or neutered.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-130. Responsibility for enforcement. The director of the animal shelter shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of sections 4-124—4-131, with the assistance of animal control.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-131. Transition. Persons harboring a dog subject to this article on the date it becomes effective shall have 120 days from such date to comply herewith.  (Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-132.
(Ord. No. O-10-7, § I, 5-18-10) Sec. 4-132. Devocalization prohibited. (a) No person shall surgically debark or silence a dog or cat, or cause the surgical debarking or silencing of a dog or cat, unless a veterinarian licensed in this state has filed a written certification with the city animal control officer in the police department stating that the surgical debarking or silencing is medically necessary to treat or relieve an illness, disease, or injury, or correct a congenital abnormally
or injury, or correct a congenital abnormally that is causing or will cause the dog or cat medical harm or pain.  (b) The written certification described in (a) shall contain the date and description of the veterinarian's examination and evaluation of the dog or cat, statement certifying that surgical debarking or silencing is medically necessary to treat or relieve an illness, disease, or injury, or correct a congenital abnormality that is causing or will cause the dog or cat harm or pain; any
or will cause the dog or cat harm or pain; any supporting diagnosis and findings, the name and current address and telephone number of the dog or cat's owner or keeper, and the name and current address and telephone number, state license number, and signature of the veterinarian.  (c) No person, except a veterinarian licensed in this state, using anesthesia, may surgically debark or silence a dog or cat.
Created: 2024-11-04 14:50:14 [EST] (Supp. No. 31)  Page 24 of 24 (d) Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-4 of the Code of Ordinances. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear cases involving violations of this section. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person convicted under this section may be barred from owning or possessing any animals, or living on the same property with someone who owns or possesses
same property with someone who owns or possesses animals, for a period of time deemed appropriate by the court, and required to take humane education, pet ownership and dog training classes as ordered by the court.  (e) Any person or business selling a dog or cat for profit shall disclose whether the dog or cat has been surgically debarked or silenced and provide the purchaser with a copy of the veterinarian certification required by section (a) above.  (Ord. No. O-11-3, § I, 3-16-11) Sec.
(a) above.  (Ord. No. O-11-3, § I, 3-16-11) Sec. 4-133. Animal confinement in motor vehicles prohibited. (a) No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has
officer or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person responsible.  (b) A law enforcement officer or animal control officer may take all steps that are reasonably is necessary to remove an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's safety, health or well-being appears to be in
safety, health or well-being appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold or lack of adequate ventilation and the conditions could reasonably be expected to cause extreme suffering or death.  Nothing in this section shall prevent a law enforcement officer or animal control officer from removing an animal from a motor vehicle if the animal's safety appears to be in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could
food or water, or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal.  (c) A law enforcement officer or animal control officer who removes an animal in accordance with this section shall, in a secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, leave written notice bearing the officer's or agent's name and office and the address of the location where the animal may be claimed. The owner may claim the animal only after payment
The owner may claim the animal only after payment of all charges that have accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment and impoundment of the animal.  (d) A law enforcement officer or animal control officer who removes an animal from a motor vehicle pursuant to this section is immune from criminal or civil liability that might otherwise result from the removal.  (e) Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-4 of the Code of
to the penalties in section 1-4 of the Code of Ordinances.  (Ord. No. O-11-1, § I, 1-11-11)